NIGHTINGALE, that all day long Had cheered the village with his song,
Nor yet at eve his note suspended,
Nor yet when eventide was ended,
Began to feel as well he mightThe keen demands of appetite ;
When, looking eagerly around,
He spied, far off, upon the ground,
Asomething shining in the dark,
Andknew the glow-wormby his spark;
So, stooping down from hawthorn top,
He thought to put him in his crop.
The worm, aware of his intent,
Harangued him thus, quite eloquent- "Did you admire my lamp," quoth he,
"As much as Iyour minstrelsy,
You would abhor to do me wrong,
As much as I to spoil your song;
For ' twas the self-same Power divine
Taught you to sing, and me to shine;


That you with music, I with light,
Might beautify and cheer the night. "
The songster heard his short oration,
And, warbling out his approbation,
Released him, as my story tells,
And found a supper somewhere else.
THE LARK AND THE ROOK
Anonymous
I've "GOODNIGHT bathed " Themydaylight wngsfades in theRook ; itsun's willsaid last soonaraylittle ; lark
I've sung my hymn to the parting day;
So now I haste to my quiet nook Inyondewy meadow-good-night, Sir Rook!"
"Good-night, poor Lark," said his titled friend With ahaughty toss and adistant bend;
"I also go to my rest profound,
But not to sleep on the cold, damp ground.
The fittest place for abird like me
Is the topmost bough of yon tall pine tree.
"I opened my eyes at peep of day And saw you taking your upward way,
Dreaming your fond romantic dreams,
An ugly speck in the sun's bright beams;
Soaring too high to be seen or heard;
And I said to myself, 'What afoolish bird!'


"I trod the park with a princely air,
I filled my crop with the richest fare;
Icawed all day 'mid alordly crew,
And I made more noise in the world than you!
The sun shone forth on my ebon wing;
I looked and wondered-good-night, poor thing!"
"Good night, once more," said the lark's sweet voice.
"I see no cause to repent my choice ;
You build your nest in the lofty pine,
But is your slumber more sweet than mine?
You make more noise in the world than I,
But whose is the sweeter minstrelsy?"
