Nold womanwas sweeping her house, and she found a little crooked sixpence. "What," said she, "shall I do with this little sixpence? I will go to market, and buy a little pig." As she was coming home, she came to a stile ; but the pig would not go over the stile. She went a little further, and she met adog. So she said to the dog- "Dog, dog, bite pig! Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night." But the dog would not. THE OLD WOMAN She went a little further, and she met a stick. So she said- "Stick, stick, beat dog! Dog won't bite pig; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night. " But the stick would not. She went a little further, and she met a fire. So she said- "Fire, fire, burn stick! Stick won't beat dog; Dog won't bite pig ; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night." But the fire would not. She went a little further, and she met some water. So she said- "Water, water, quench fire ! Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat dog; Dogwon't bite pig; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night." But the water would not. So she went a little further, and she met an ox. So she said THE OLD WOMAN "Ox, ox, drink water! Water won't quench fire ; Fire won't burn stick ; Stick won't beat dog; Dog won't bite pig ; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night." But the ox would not. She went a little further, and she met a butcher. So she said- "Butcher, butcher, kill ox! Ox won't drink water; Water won't quench fire ; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat dog; Dog won't bite pig; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night." But the butcher would not. She went a little further, and she met a rope. So she saidJun. Cl-10 "Rope, rope, hang butcher! Butcher won't kill ox; Ox won't drink water; Water won't quench fire ; Fire won't burn stick ; Stick won't beat dog; Dog won't bite pig ; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night. " THE OLD WOMAN But the rope would not. She went a little further, and she met a rat. So she said- "Rat, rat, gnaw rope ! Rope won't hang butcher; Butcher won't kill ox; Ox won't drink water ; Water won't quench fire ; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat dog ; Dog won't bite pig; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night." But the rat would not. She went a little further, and she met a cat. So she said- "Cat, cat, kill rat! Rat won't gnaw rope; Rope won't hang butcher; Butcher won't kill ox; Ox won't drink water ; Water won't quench fire; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat dog; Dog won't bite pig; Pig won't get over the stile, And I shan't get home to-night." The cat said, "If you will give me a saucer of milk, I will kill the rat. " THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS So the old woman gave the cat the milk, and when she had lapped up the milkThe cat began to kill the rat ; The rat began to gnaw the rope; The rope began to hang the butcher ; The butcher began to kill the ox; The ox began to drink the water ; The water began to quench the fire ; The fire began to burn the stick ; The stick began to beat the dog; The dog began to bite the pig ; The pig jumped over the stile, And so the old woman got home that night.