Esons of freedom, wake to glory ! Hark! hark ! what myriads bid you rise ! Your childen, wives, and grandsires hoary, Behold their tears and hear their cries ! Shall hateful tyrants, mischiefs breeding, With hireling hosts, a ruffian band, Affright and desolate the land, While peace and liberty lie bleeding? To arms ! to arms ! ye brave! Th' avenging sword unsheathe; March on! march on! all hearts resolved Onvictory or death. Now, now the dangerous storm is rolling, Which treacherous kings confederate raise ; The dogs of war, let loose, are howling, And lo! our fields and cities blaze; And shall we basely view the ruin, While lawless force, with guilty stride, Spreads desolation far and wide, With crimes and blood his hands embruing? To arms ! to arms ! ye brave! Th' avenging sword unsheathe; March on! march on! allhearts resolved Onvictory or death. O Liberty! can man resign thee, Once having felt thy generous flame? Candungeons, bolts, or bars confine thee? Or whips thy noble spirit tame? NATIONAL HYMN OF NORWAY Too long the world has wept, bewailing That falsehood's dagger tyrants wield, But freedom is our sword and shield, And all their arts are unavailing. To arms ! to arms ! ye brave! Th' avenging sword unsheathe ; March on! march on! all hearts resolved Onvictory or death. SWEDISH NATIONAL AIR THOU HOU ancient, thou healthful, thou mountainous North, Where joy with peaceful beauty dallies ; I hail thee, fairest land on earth, Thy sun, thy sky and green valleys, Thy sun, thy sky and green valleys. NATIONAL HYMN OF NORWAY LOVELooking wewellforth ourwith stormvision -beatenclear land; , Yes, we love our native land And thousand homes so dear. Cherish we the home of parents ; Land of Norsemen bold, With the stories to us given, From the sagas old, With the weird and wondrous stories, Like lingering dreams of old! ITALIAN NATIONAL HYMN LL forward! All forward! AAll forward to battle! the trumpets are crying, All forward! All forward! our old flag is flying, When Liberty calls us we linger no longer ; Rebels, come on! tho' a thousand to one! Liberty! Liberty! deathless and glorious, Under thy banner thy sons are victorious, Free souls are valiant, and strong arms are stronger, Godshall go with us, and battle be won. Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for our banner, the flag of the free. All forward! All forward! All forward for Freedom! In terrible splendor She comes to the loyal who die to defend her ; Her stars and stripes o'er the wild wave of battle Shall float in the heavens to welcome us on. All forward! to glory, thro' life-blood is pouring, Where bright swords are flashing, and cannons are roaring, Welcome to death in the bullet's quick rattle, Fighting or falling shall freedom be won. Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for the banner ! Hurrah for our banner, the flag of the free. All forward! All forward! All forward to conquer! Where free hearts are beating, Death to the cowardwho dreams of retreating! DANISH NATIONAL HYMN Liberty calls us from mountain and valley; Waving her banner she leads to the fight. Forward! all forward! the trumpets are crying ; The drum beats to arms, our old flag is flying ; Stout hearts and strong hands around it shall rally, Forward to battle, for God and the Right. Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for our banner, the flag of the free. DANISH NATIONAL HYMN ING Christian stood by lofty mast, In mist and smoke. His sword was hammering so fast, Thro' Gothic helm and brain it pass'd, Then sank each hostile hulk and mast, In mist and smoke. "Fly," shouted they; "fly he who can! Who braves of Denmark's Christian, Who braves of Denmark's Christian the stroke." Nils Juel gave heed to th' tempest's roar, Now is the hour! He hoisted his blood-red flag once more, And smote upon the foe full sore, Andshouted loud thro' the tempest's roar, "Now is the hour." "Fly!" shouted they, "for shelter fly ! Of Denmark's Juel who can defy, Of Denmark's Juel who can defy the power?" SPANISH NATIONAL HYMN North Sea! aglimpse of Wessel rent Thy murky sky ! Then champions to thine arms were sent; Terror and Death glared where he went; From the waves was heard a wail, that rent Thy murky sky ! From Denmark thunders Tordenskiol! Let each to Heav'n commend his soul, Let each to Heav'n commend his soul andfly. Path of the Dane to fame and might! Dark rolling wave! Receive thy friend, who scorning flight, Goes to meet danger with despite, Proudly as thou the tempest's might, Dark rolling wave! 'Mid mingled pleasures and alarms, Andwar and vict'ry be thine arms, 'Midwar and vict'ry, be thine arms mygrave. SPANISH NATIONAL HYMN PREAD the tidings afar to the nations, Let them learn from the freedom of Spain, For the laws are the people's salvation, And our King as their servant shall reign. For their country, true Spaniards will dare it, Dare to perish for Liberty's cause To the tories' destruction, we swear it! Live forever the King andthe laws. AUSTRIAN NATIONAL SONG OD uphold thee, mighty Emperor, Monarch of our Eastern land. Power and Wisdom e'er attend thee, Righteousness with thee shall stand, Till the laurel crown'd, a victor, All hearts bow at thy command. God uphold thee, and defend thee, Emperor of our Austrian land! Happy flow'ry land! His scepter rules o'er valley, mount and plain. Mildly, calmly, justly ruleth, He the people's love would gain, Yet his weaponed might, in splendor Beams thro' all the land amain. God uphold thee, warrior, Father, Monarch of our Austrian land! He delights the poor to cherish, He awakes the minstrel's lay, He would not that any perish, All admire the gentle sway. "Heaven reward him, God defend him," Thus we sing, and thus we pray. Kaiser, Emperor, Monarch, Father, All thy peaceful rule obey! He from bondage will deliver, He would make us truly free ! THE HAND OF LINCOLN In the German heart shall ever He the brightest memory be. Till in other worlds, a welcome Greets in blest eternity. God defend thee, God attend thee, Emperor, Franz, all hail to thee!