PUBLISHERS' FOREWORD TO DR.
WILLIAM ALLAN NEILSON'S
READING GUIDE FOR THE
D
JUNIOR CLASSICS
R. WILLIAM ALLAN NEILSON, Presi- dent of Smith College, Northampton, Mass.,
formerly Professor of English, Harvard Univer- sity, has so enriched The Junior Classics by his
comprehensive Reading Guide on each and every volume of the set as to make the set, which is a
vast storehouse of literary treasures, a collection of practical, workable textbooks of literature for the education of the young readers.
The Junior Classics contain the greatest literature of prose and poemthat every junior must have onwhich to build a firm foundation for the development of a well-balanced education.
Indiscriminate reading is pure and simple pleasure-reading, whereas systematic reading, that is, reading with the object in view of completely covering a subject or period of literature, is educa- tional reading and permanent in value.
Dr. Neilson in his Reading Guide to The Junior
Classics has provided just this systematic course of reading that firmly imprints on the mind the gems of prose and poetry of the collection.
Jun. Cl-10 451 15

THE JUNIOR CLASSICS
READING GUIDE
With Lists of the Best Books for Young People
BY WILLIAM ALLAN NEILSON, PH. D.
President Smith College, Northampton, Mass.,
formerly Professor of English, Harvard University
Associate Editor of The Harvard Classics, Editor of The Tudor Shakespeare,
The Chief Elizabethan Dramatists, The Types of English Literature, Author of Essentials of Poetry, etc.
T
VOLUME I
FAIRY AND WONDER TALES
HERE are people who doubt the wisdom of permitting
their children to hear or to read fairy tales. In their
zeal for truth, they fear that these narratives of the
impossible and the fantastic will accustom the young mind
to falsehood and cancel their efforts to train their boys and
girls in habits of veracity. This attitude is due to two things chiefly: a verbal confusion, and an ignoring of some
familiar facts in the development of the human mind.
For, in the first place, everybody knows that a fictitious tale
that makes no pretense of being history is a quite different thing from a lie, which implies the intent to deceive;
and a very slight observation of children makes it clear
that it is only sophisticated grown-up people who need to
have the distinction pointed out. In the second place, the
world of imagination is the natural habitation of the child.
The inverted chair which serves in turn as steamship, pulpit, locomotive, or fortress is only a symbol of the triumphant mastery of mind over matter in the young, a mastery which is only too soon checked by the pressure of material
fact in the modern world. As the boy grows to manhood,
453
READING GUIDE
his preeminence among his fellows largely depends on the
extent to which his imaginative powers have resisted and
survived this attack. In the field of morals, it needs imagination to create that sympathy, that power of putting one's
self in the other man's place, without which philanthropic
effort is apt to be tactless, cold, and even injurious.
the fields of science and industry, imaginative range, the
capacity to form clear visions of combinations and developments not yet realized, is the most precious of faculties.
In the field of art, imagination is the mainspring, and everything else is merely contributory. Thus it is not dangerous
but only wise, during that period when the imagination is naturally most active, to feed and guide rather than suppress it; and these stories, gathered largely from the youth
of the world, are among the most potent aids to this end.
In
The Junior Classics begin appropriately with the tales
of our own Indians. These represent that stage of civilization when as yet man did not distinguish different kinds
of existence, and stones, clouds, trees, beasts, and men were
thought of as all having the same kind of life, as all having
souls, and so being capable of intercommunication, interchange of forms, and even intermarriage. This belief explains not only the names, but also many of the strange
incidents of these mythological tales. Most of the Indian
stories here given were gathered by Schoolcraft, the distinguished student of the American Indian and collector of
their legends. It was from Schoolcraft that Longfellow
derived his material for Hiawatha, and that poem may fitly
beused as asequel to these tales as the children grow older.
Manabozho, who appears in the frontispiece of this volume,
wasthe Algonquin Hiawatha.
Of many of the tales from India an explanation may again
be found in a current belief. The teaching of the Buddha
included the doctrine of transmigration of souls, and both
the frequency of animal stories and the constant teaching of
kindness to animals are due to this belief, abelief which be
454
READING GUIDE
comes very vivid when one realizes that according to it one's
dogmay have the soul of one's father.
Most of the other stories belong to the great body of
folk-tales, derived from very various sources and ever travelling from district to district and people to people, sometimes springing up independently in surprisingly similar
shapes, but in general full of the charm and entertainment of the genuinely popular tale. Some, however, are deliberately invented: those of the Danish Hans Andersen, most
successful of all moderns in the imitation of the traditional
fairy tale; and those, centuries older, that go by the name
of the shadowy Esop, fables made by many men in many
lands and at many times, for the purpose of embodying the
fragments of worldly wisdom which are usually summed up
in their "morals."
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Esop's Fables-Edited by Joseph Jacobs. Andersen, H. C.-Fairy Tales Tales.
Arabian Nights-Lane's Translation.
Asbjörnsen, P. C.-Fairy Tales from the Far North.
Bell, F. E. E.-Fairy Tale Plays.
Boyesen, H. H.-Norseland Tales.
Browne, Francis-Fairy Tales.
Browne, Francis-The Wonderful Chair.
Bulfinch, Thomas-The Age of Fable.
Bunce, John T.-Fairy Tales, Their Origin and Meaning.
Catlin, George-The Boy's Book on Indians.
Compton, Margaret-American Indian Fairy Stories.
Darton, F. J. H.-Wonder Book of Beasts.
Deming, E. W.-Indian Child Life, Red Folk and Wild Folk.
Dole, N. H.-Russian Fairy Book.
Grimm, J. L. and W. K. German Household Tales.
Guerber, H. M. A.-Myths of Northern Lands.
Hall, Jennie-Viking Tales.
Holbrook, Florence-Book of Nature Myths.
Jacobs, Joseph-English Fairy Tales.
La Fontaine, Jean de Fables.
Lang, Andrew-The Blue Fairy Book, and Other Fairy Books Lansing, M. F.-Tales of Old England in Prose and Verse.
Pitman, Norman H.-Chinese Fairy Tales.
Pyle, Katherine-Fairy Tales from Many Lands.
455
VOLUME II
FOLK TALES AND MYTHS OF ALL NATIONS
T
HE earliest myths everywhere were the attempts of
primitive people to explain the world in which they
lived, early science as much as religion, in which imagination played more part than observation or experiment. American Indian stories, such as those in the first
volume, are as pure an example of these myths as any; and
a special type is to be found in those called by folk-lorists
"pourquois" or why-stories like "Why the Hippopotamus
Lives in the Water," and "Why the Elephant Has Small
Eyes. " Here the attempt to satisfy primitive curiosity, a
curiosity which is as apparent in every child as in every young race, is to be seen undisguised by the trimmings of
the literary artist.
But as time went on and civilization developed, people
become more critical and exacting. The tellers of the
myths found it necessary to make their stories hold together
better, and conform to man's gradually increasing knowledge of nature. In many cases, the primitive scientific
purpose of the myth was lost sight of altogether, and the
tale developed as a piece of entertainment, sometimes attached to gods, or to ancestry, or to the history of the nation,
but interesting chiefly as a story. The pieces contained in
this volume illustrate various stages of this process, from the why-stories just mentioned to the purely literary retelling of local legends like Washington Irving's "Rip Van
Winkle" and "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow." Stories
like those of Thor and Balder, and the Norse explanation
of "How All Things Began" belong obviously to the period
of attempted answers to the universal questions of Whence ?
456
READING GUIDE
How? Why? while those of Brunhilda and Siegfried and
of Lohengrin are later, but still much more primitive than
the re-tellings of the same stories in the music dramas of
Wagner. Iceland was converted to Christianity about the
year 1000 A. D., and the stories of the mythological sagas of the North, here exemplified, originated before that
date, though in their written forms they belong to Christian
times. They represent the religious legends of the pagan
Norsemen, elaborated and made more coherent by later
writers. Modern poems like William Morris's "Sigurd the
Volsung" and translations of the Nibelungenlied may well
be used to give older children a fuller knowledge of these
themes.
The Greek myths here represented are also far removed
from the primitive type, and in the form in which they
have come down to us show abundant traces of the more or
less conscious handling of generations of story-tellers, who
have added much to the interest and picturesqueness of the original myths, while they have dropped many elements
which had either become meaningless, or had come to be
felt too barbarous for the taste of a more refined age. The
"Story of Cupid and Psyche" is an instance of a quite late
mythological tale, the form in which we know it appearing
first in The Golden Ass of Apuleius, as late as the second
century of our era.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Baldwin, James-Story of Siegfried.
Bulfinch, Thomas-Legends of Charlemagne.
Burns, J.-Popular Tales and Legends.
Buxton, E. M. Wilmot-Stories of Norse Heroes.
Buxton, E. M. Wilmot-Stories of Persian Heroes.
Chapin, A. A.-Wonder Tales from Wagner.
Curtin, J.-Myths and Folk Tales of the Russians.
Darton, F. J. H.-Wonder Book of Beasts.
Drake, S. A.-North East Legends.
Emerson, Ellen R.-Indian Myths.
Foster, Mary H., and Cummings, Mabel M.--Asgard Stories.
457
READING GUIDE
Francillon, R. E.-Gods and Heroes.
Gayley, F.-Classic Myths in English Literature.
Griffis, W. E.-The Japanese Fairy World.
Guerber, H. M. A.-Myths of Greece and Rome.
Harris, Joel Chandler-Nights with Uncle Remus.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel-Tanglewood Tales.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel-The Wonder Book.
Hearn, Lafcadio-Kwaidan.
Houghton, Mrs. L.-A Russian Grandmother's Wonder Tales.
Hutchinson, W. M. L.-The Golden Porch, a Book of Greek Fairy Tales.
Kennedy, Patrick-Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts. Kipling, Rudyard-The Jungle Book. Kipling, Rudyard-The Second Jungle Book.
Lang, Andrew-Animal Story Book.
Litchfield, Mary E.-The Nine Wonders.
Mabie, Hamilton Wright-Legends Every Child Should Know.
Macaulay, Thomas B., Lord-Lays of Ancient Rome.
Maud, Constance-Wagner's Heroes.
Maud, Constance-Wagner's Heroines.
Mitchell, S. W.-Prince Little Boy.
Norton, Charles Eliot-Heart of Oak Books.
Nutt, Alfred-Folk Lore.
Peabody, Josephine P.-Old Greek Folk Stories.
Pierson, Clara D.-Among the Farmyard People.
Pierson, Clara D.-Among the Meadow People.
Pierson, Clara D.-Among the Night People.
Rouse, W. H. B. The Talking Thrush.
Saintine, X. B.-Myths of the Rhine.
Scudder, H. E.-Book of Folk Stories.
Scudder, H. E.-Fables and Folk Stories.
Skinner, C. M.-Myths and Legends.
Steele, Flora A.-Tales of the Punjab.
Wilde, Lady-Ancient Legends.
Young, Filson-Stories of the Wagner Operas.
458
W
VOLUME III
TALES FROM GREECE AND ROME
E have now seen how the myth is gradually transformed into the artistic story, the element of the
explanation of nature giving way to the desire to glorify the family or nation, or to the interest in an absorbing narrative. The "Old Greek Tales" which occupy the
first two hundred pages of the present volume are very
close to the "Myths of Greece and Rome" of the second
volume, and all of them are far from being pure myths.
One evidence of this is the tendency of the stories to gather
round a center, some great hero or far-reaching event; and
the organization of these groups is evidence enough of the
presence of the work of artists in fiction. The stories connected with such demigods as Hercules, or such heroes as
Theseus and Jason, are prominent examples; but the most
famous of all are the tales which center in the siege of Troy,
and which formed the theme not only of the great Greek
epics, but also of a considerable number of the Greek
tragedies.
The "Tales of the Trojan War" and "The Homeward
Voyage of Ulysses" are, of course, derived from the Iliad
and Odyssey of Homer, and older children may well be encouraged to read these in the complete translations of Lang,
Leaf, and Myers, and of Butcher and Lang. The original
material of these poems had certainly passed through the
mouths of many generations of Greeks before it was committed to writing. Separate episodes had been chanted in public by professional reciters, and the form in which we
know the stories is the result of the moulding of many minds, and betrays the reaction upon the material of the
459
READING GUIDE
tastes and emotions of generations of auditors. Who
finally organized them into their present shape, when they
became two complete epics, whether Homer alone was the
final editor, who Homer himself was, if he was anything
but a name-these are questions upon which scholars are
not yet agreed, and probably will never be agreed. But of
the perennial interest of the deeds of Achilles and Hector,
of the romantic wanderings of Ulysses, of the singular nobility and simplicity of the story-telling, there is and can
be no question. Here for all time is a storehouse of great
deeds, of noble emotions, of universal types of human
character, that can never cease to influence the ideals of
the race.
In the Eneid of Virgil the Roman poet took the Homeric
epics as his model, and strove with all the skill of a great
literary artist to weld the traditions of his people into a
work that would be to his nation what the Iliad and the
Odyssey were to the Greeks. The material, as before, was
legendary and connected with Troy; but here the whole
transmutation into a heroic poem was the work of one man,
gaining thus unity and polish, but wanting, as was inevi- table, much of the spontaneity, freshness, and "popularity,"
in the best sense, which constitute so much of the charm of
Homer.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Ashton, T.-Romances of Chivalry.
Baldwin, James-Old Greek Stories.
Baldwin, James-Story of the Golden Age.
Brooks, E.-The Story of the Æneid.
Brooks, E.-The Story of the Odyssey.
Bryant, William Cullen-The Iliad.
Bryant, William Cullen-The Odyssey.
Bulfinch, Thomas-The Age of Chivalry.
Carpenter. E. J.-Long Ago in Greece.
Church, Alfred J.-The Greek Gulliver.
Church, Alfred J.-Stories from Ovid.
Church, Alfred J.-Stories from Virgil.
Church, Alfred J.-Stories of the Old World.
460
READING GUIDE
i
Church, Alfred J.-Wonder Stories from Lucian.
Clodd, E.-The Birth and Growth of Myths.
Clodd, E.-The Childhood of Religions.
Cox, George W.-Tales of Ancient Greece.
Crommelin, Mary-Famous Legends.
Fisk, John-Myths and Myth Makers.
Hanson, G. H. Stories of Old Rome.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel-Tanglewood Tales.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel-The Wonder Book.
Hulme, F. E.-Mythland.
Kingsley, Charles-Greek Heroes.
Kupler, Grace H. Stories of LongAgo.
Lamb, Charles-The Adventures of Ulysses.
Leitz, A. F.-Legends and Stories.
Lowell, D. O. S.-Jason's Quest.
Morris, W.-The Earthly Paradise.
Murray, A. S.-Manual of Mythology.
Perry, W. C.-The Boy's Iliad.
Perry, W. C. -The Boy's Odyssey.
Tappan, Eva M.-The Story of the Greek People.
Tappan, Eva M.-The Story of the Roman People.
White, John S.-Plutarch for Boys andGirls.
Yonge, Charlotte M.-The Cook and the Captive, A
Romans in Gaul.
Storyofthe
461
!
IN
VOLUME IV
HEROES AND HEROINES OF CHIVALRY
N this volume we pass from the myths and legends of antiquity to the romances and chronicles of the Middle
Ages. An old French writer once classified the materials of narrative poetry into three divisions, the matter of
Britain, the matter of France, and the matter of Rome.
To him the matter of Rome meant mainly the exploits of
Julius Cæsar; of France, the deeds of Charlemagne and
his peers; of Britain, the stories of Arthur and the Round
Table. The last two of these are abundantly represented
here.
The historical Arthur was a British chieftain who led
his people in their attempts to beat off the invasion of the
pagan Angles and Saxons about the latter part of the fifth
century of our era. It is one of the ironies of history that
he should have become the most prominent hero in the
literature of the descendants of the people against whom
he fought. The small fragment of historical fact about Arthur was elaborated from legendary and imaginative
sources by chroniclers and romancers in England and
France; and, after the development of chivalry, he took his
place in the French and later in the English romances as
the ideal king and Christian knight, the center of a vast
cycle of stories which spread through all the countries of
western Europe.
Toward the close of the Middle Ages, an English gentleman and soldier, Sir Thomas Malory, retold in prose a
great number of these romantic tales, and it is on his form
of them that the version in the present collection is based.
Older readers may be directed to the vigorous if some
462
READING GUIDE
what archaic prose of Malory himself, and to modern poetical versions like those of Arnold, Morris, Swinburne, and especially of Tennyson in the Idylls of the King. Though these stories present a picture of a society such as probably never existed in just this form (and cer- tainly not in the time of the historical Arthur), they yet
give an inspiring view of the chivalrous ideal which has
exercised so potent an influence on conduct these many
centuries.
The tales of Havelok and Horn are favorable examples
of the mediæval romances which were not attached to the
court of Arthur, and represent a somewhat simpler social
life than the Arthurian romances.
Among the various sources from which were gathered the stories that became connected with Arthur were the
Welsh legends. Some of these were genuine Celtic tales,
others had been earlier borrowed from the neighboring
French and English; and a collection of them, made for the
use of professional story-tellers, is known as The Mabinogion, from which, in Lady Guest's translation, the second
section of the present volume is drawn. The complete work
is now easily accessible, and contains a number of excellent
stories.
The poetic treatment of the "matter of France" began
with the famous Song of Roland and extended into the
huge mass of so-called chansons de geste, second in interest
only to the Arthurian stories in the literature of Old
French. This, like the "matter of Britain," spread to all
the surrounding countries, but it was in Italy, next to
France itself, that it attained its greatest popularity. Not only did it supply themes to artistic poets like Ariosto and
Boiardo, but the stories of Charlemagne continue to this
day as the favorite reading of the common people in Italy;
and one may see in the puppet theatres of the Italian
quarter of New York a vigorous if crude representation of
the deeds of Roland and Oliver, applauded with heartfelt
463
READING GUIDE
enthusiasm by our Italian fellow-citizens. In the present
selection the most striking episodes of the Song of Roland are given in simple form, and the whole poem may be read
in agood English verse translation.
What Charlemagne and Roland were to the French, the
Cid was to the Spanish; and Southey's version of The
Chronicle of the Cid properly takes its place here beside
the Morte d'Arthur and the Roland.
These romantic narratives are all in a sense aristocratic,
both in the personages with whom they deal and in the audiences for which they were originally composed. The ballads
dealing with Robin Hood, however, are of the common people,
and give an equally vigorous presentation of popular ideals
of justice and fair play.
The Tales from Chaucer are typical examples of the
work of that master of story-tellers : all of them far older
than Chaucer, but owing to his tact and skill, their admirable rapidity and point. The story of "Patient Griselda"
is interesting not only as showing a feminine ideal remote
enough from ours, but also as having come to Chaucer
through the versions of the two great Italians, Boccaccio
and Petrarch.
By the end of the sixteenth century, chivalry as an institution had practically passed away, but it continued largely
to dominate imaginative literature until the Spaniard, Cervantes, turned the outworn romantic material to ridicule
in his satire, Don Quixote. This great novel has escaped
the usual fate of satires of contemporary life because it
rises above the merely temporary and deals with permanent elements in human nature and society with such insight and humor that it appeals to us almost as keenly as
it did to the men for whom it was written. It is placed here appropriately enough with the romances which it
satirizes, but it may be found that it suits the taste of
somewhat older readers than the youngest who can enjoy Arthur and Roland.
464
READING GUIDE
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Ashton, T.-Romances of Chivalry.
Baldwin, James-The Story of Roland.
Baring-Gould, S.-Curious Myths of the Middle Ages.
Brown, Abbie F.-Northland Heroes.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de-Adventures of Don Quixote de la Mancha.
Child, Clarence G.-Beowulf.
Church, Alfred J.-Heroes of Chivalry and Romance.
Clarke, H. B. Cid Campeador.
Cox, George W.-Popular Romances of the Middle Ages.
Curtin, J.-Hero Tales of Ireland.
Du Maurier, George-Legend of Camelot. Gilbert, H. F. B.-King Arthur's Knights.
Greene, F. N.-Legends of King Arthur and His Court.
Hall, J.-Legends of the West.
Hare, Christopher-The Story of Bayard.
Hunt, R.-Popular Romances of the West of England.
Lang, Andrew-Modern Mythology.
Lanier, Sydney-The Boy's King Arthur.
Mabie, Hamilton Wright-Norse Tales.
Macleod, Mary-The Book of King Arthur.
Macleod, Mary-Stories of the Faerie Queene.
Markham, Richard-Heroes of Chivalry.
Maxwell, Sir H. E. Robert the Bruce.
Pyle, Howard-Story of King Arthur.
Pyle, Howard-The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood.
Renninger, Elizabeth D.-The Story of Rustum.
Rolleston, T. W.-High Deeds of Finn and other Bardic Romances of Ancient Ireland.
Saintine, X. B.-Myths of the Rhine.
Schrammen, J.-Legends of German Heroes of the Middle Ages.
Southey, Robert-Chronicles of the Cid.
Stevens, Lillian O., and Allen, E.
Malory.
F.-King Arthur Stories from
Tappan, E. M.-Robin Hood: His Book.
Tappan, E. M.-When Knights Were Bold.
Wilson, Calvin D.-The Story of the Cid.
465
S
VOLUME V
STORIES THAT NEVER GROW OLD
INCE the first translation of The Thousand and One
Nights into English, they have held a unique place
in the interest of young readers. Remote though they
are in every way from the experience of the Western
peoples, fantastic and extravagant in their use of magic and the supernatural, they never fail to hold the attention,
and, in spite of their imaginative wildness, they give a
living picture of the manners and mode of life of the gorgeous East. They are, of course, not the work of one
man, but the fitting into a single framework of a great
variety of stories found in many forms throughout the
Orient.
It is a far cry from the Arabian Nights to Robinson
Crusoe, with its fictitious adventures presented with all
the circumstantial detail of sober history. No one has excelled Defoe in this particular trick of realism, and much
of the hold of the book is due to the illusion that results
from it. But the nature of Crusoe's adventures are precisely
such as to interest boys in the camping and boat-building
stage, and none of Defoe's many imitators have been able
to surpass him.
In writing Gulliver's Travels, Swift had no intention of providing entertainment for the young. His aim was
to make a satire, in part on the government of England in
his day, in part on human nature at large. The point of
much of the satire has disappeared, and practically none
of it is perceived by the modern child; but there happens
to remain in the narrative medium in which he conveyed
his satire a residuum of exciting adventure which makes
466
READING GUIDE
the book a children's classic. It is, however, best read by the
young in selections.
The Pilgrim's Progress is another accidental children's
classic. The work is an elaborate allegory of the Christian
life interpreted in terms of Puritan theology; but, like all
the best allegory, the surface story is interesting on its own
account, and it is for this that children read it. The
spiritual meaning, however, is by no means so obscure as
Swift's satire in Gulliver; but there need be no fear of theological bias. Whatever of the underlying meaning is likely to be caught by the young reader, is of the nature of gen- erally accepted moral and religious truth; and some of the
characters rank with the great creations of modern fiction as
permanent types of human nature.
Of the stories of Shakespeare's plays and Scott's novels
there is no need to speak. Their chief function here is to
give such a taste of these writers as will entice the reader
to go direct to the fountain head.
The literature of adventure reaches its anti-climax in The
Startling Adventures of Baron Munchausen. This is a classic
of the preposterous, and few children fail to enjoy this extreme example of the humor of the long-bow.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Abbott, Jacob-Rollo Books.
Addison, Steele, Budgell-Papers of Roger de Coverley.
Aguilar, Grace-The Days of Bruce.
Aiken, John, and Barbauld, Anna Letitia-Evenings At Home.
Alcott, L. M.-Eight Cousins ; or, The Aunt-Hill.
Alcott, L. M.-Little Women; or, Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy.
Aldrich, T. B.-Story of a Bad Boy.
Aspinwall, Mrs. Alicia-Short Stories for Short People.
Bunyan, John-Pilgrim's Progress.
Clemens, S. L.-Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
Cooper, J. F.-The Deerslayer, A Tale.
Cooper, J. F.-Last of the Mohicans.
Cooper, J. F.-The Pathfinder; or, The Inland Sea.
Cooper, J. F.-The Pioneers ; or, The Sources of the Susque- hanna.
467
READING GUIDE
Cooper, J. F.-The Prairie.
Day, Thomas-Sandford and Merton.
Defoe, Daniel-Robinson Crusoe.
De la Ramée (Ouida) -The Nurnberg Stove.
Dickens, Charles-Personal History and Experience of David Copperfield the Younger.
Edgeworth, Maria-Popular Tales.
Edgeworth, Maria-Tales That Never Die.
Eliot, George-Silas Marner.
Goldsmith, Oliver-The Vicar of Wakefield.
Howitt, Mary-Treasury of Tales.
Hughes, Thomas-Tom Brown At Oxford.
Hughes, Thomas-Tom Brown's School-Days.
Hugo, Victor-Les Miserables.
Kingsley, Charles-Westward Ho!
Lever, C. J.-Charles O'Malley.
Lucas, E. V.-Forgotten Tales of Long Ago.
Lucas, E. V.-Old Fashioned Tales.
Lytton, Bulwer-Last Days of Pompeii.
Marryat, Capt. Frederick-Masterman Ready.
Marryat, Capt. Frederick-Mr. Midshipman Easy.
Porter, Jane-Scottish Chiefs.
Scott, Sir Walter-Guy Mannering.
Whittier, John Greenleaf-Child Life in Prose.
Wyss, Johann R.-Swiss Family Robinson.
468
W
VOLUME VI
OLD-FASHIONED TALES
ITH this volume we arrive at a period in which it is no longer necessary to deal with translations
and modernizations, but in which we have the advantage of reading the actual words of the original writers
without that loss of flavor and accent entailed by even the
best translation.
The first half of the sixth volume contains stories which,
although by modern authors, are largely modeled on folkstories of the type contained in the earlier volumes. Some are examples of how close some of our writers in English
can come to the skill in fairy tales shown by Hans Ander- sen. Others, like Hawthorne's "Great Stone Face," have
an underlying meaning, yet not so deeply buried as to be
beyond the reach of young readers, and adding to the entertainment of the literal tale the pleasure of deciphering ariddle
and the profit of a great lesson.
Some of the extracts are beautiful merely as English prose.
The specimens from Ruskin, Dickens, and Hawthorne can
be read aloud in such away as,bymaking obvious the beauty
of their style, to cultivate the ear of the listeners, and begin
to add, though unconsciously at first, to the delight in the
story the more subtle enjoyment that comes from the perception of fine cadences.
The work of Lewis Carroll stands alone. There is
humor in the very idea of the sober Oxford clergyman
and lecturer on mathematics, Charles Lutwidge Dodgson,
disporting himself with the most delightful nonsense ever
written, for the entertainment of a small girl. Alice in
Wonderland and its companion volume, Through the Looking
469
READING GUIDE
Glass, have the ideal qualities of books to be read aloud
by adults to children; for while the young listener is delighted with the fantastic absurdities of the story, the reader
has his own reward in the delicate irony that plays about
the descriptions of the actors and incidents, and in the brilliant cleverness constantly exhibited both in the phrasing
and in the conceiving of situations. Moreover, these are
essentially social books. If any reader, perusing them in solitude, fails to find the charm, let him have patience till
he has tried them incompany. Friendships have been formed
on no solider basis than a capacity to exchange allusions
to Alice; and many agrown-up has found his way to a child's
heart through a common acquaintance with the Hatter and
the March Hare.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Abbott, Jacob-Franconia Stories.
Ainsworth, William Harrison-Old St. Paul's.
Austen, Jane-Pride and Prejudice.
Austen, Jane-Standish of Standish, A Story of the Pilgrims.
Barr, Mrs. A. E.-Bow of Orange Ribbon.
Burnett, Frances Hodgson-Little Lord Fauntleroy.
Carroll, Lewis-Alice's Adventures in Wonderland.
Carroll, Lewis-Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There.
Clemens, Samuel L.-The Prince and the Pauper.
Dana, R. H.-Two Years Before the Mast.
Deland, Margaret-Old Chester Tales.
Dickens, Charles-Tale of Two Cities.
Dodge, Mary Mapes-Hans Brinker; or, The Silver Skates.
Fox, John, Jr.-Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come.
Hale, E. E.-Ten Times One Is Ten, and Other Stories,
Hale, Lucretia P.-The Peterkin Papers.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel-Twice-Told Tales.
Holmes, Oliver Wendell-Elsie Venner.
Jewett, S. O.-Betty Leicester ; A Story for Girls.
Kipling, Rudyard-Just So Stories for Little Children.
Mitchell, S. W.-Hugh Wynne, Free Quaker.
Reade, Charles-The Cloister and the Hearth.
Shelley, Mrs. Mary-Frankenstein ; or, The Modern Prometheus.
Wiggin, Kate Douglas-The Birds' Christmas Carol.
Yonge, Charlotte M.-The Heir of Redclyffe.
470
ليه
T
VOLUME VII
STORIES OF COURAGE AND HEROISM
HE contents of the seventh volume deal, for the
most part, with historical persons and events, and
cxhibit qualities of courage and heroism in action.
The episodes are gathered from a wide range of place and
time, from the illustrious figures of antiquity to the unnamed heroes of obscure crises in our own land and day;
but the greater number tell of deeds an acquaintance with
which is an essential part of everyone's intellectual background. The Spartans at Thermopyle, Julius Cæsar
crossing the Rubicon, the English victories at Crecy and
Poitiers, the heroism of Joan of Arc, the tragedy of James
I of Scotland, the voyages of Columbus, the seadogs of
the age of Elizabeth, the adventures of the pioneers of
America, the pathos of the Acadian exiles, the glories and
terrors of the Napoleonic wars, the peaceful heroism of
Grace Darling-such themes as these are of vast influence
on more than one side of a child's education. The accounts
of such things given here are necessarily short, but they
should serve to introduce young readers to some of the
most glorious achievements in human history, and at the
same time to rouse that curiosity which is the best introduction to the serious study of history.
But the most important educational effect of these fragments of heroism is in the formation of character. The
kind of man a boy is to become is largely determined by
the kind of man he admires; and the reading of stories
such as are contained in this volume may be of great
importance in forming his admirations. Though here we
are dealing with historical personages and historical happenings, it is still through the imagination that the effect
471
READING GUIDE
on character is produced. Out of what he sees and hears
the boy gradually and unconsciously forms his ideal of
what he would like to be; and it is important that he should be made familiar with figures more loftily heroic than
the pitcher of the local baseball team, if we wish him to aim
at acareer higher than that of aprofessional athlete.
The attaining of this end of influence on character does
not, however, imply the turning of the stories into texts
for moral lectures. The effect, as has been said, is unconscious. The important thing is that the talk about a
story which has been read should bring out clearly the point
wherein the heroism lay, and this is done all the more effectively when it is not reduced to abstract terms, but left a
vivid concrete imaginative picture of a real human being
doing a fine thing.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Baldwin, James-An American Book of Golden Deeds.
Barnes, James-Midshipman Farragut.
Bass, Florence-Stories of Pioneer Life.
Blackmore, Richard D.-Springhaven.
Brady, C. T.-For the Freedom of the Sea.
Brooks, E. S.-A Boy of the First Empire.
Brooks, Noah-The Boy Emigrants.
Carlyle, Thomas-Heroes and Hero Worship.
Catherwood, M. H.-Heroes of the Middle West.
Clemens, Samuel L.-Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc.
Dumas, Alexandre-The Three Musketeers.
Ewart, Henry C.-Heroes and Martyrs of Science.
Fowler, A. E.-Patriotic Stories of America.
Grinnell, G. B. Jack, the Young Ranchman.
Hall, Thomas W.-Heroes of Our Revolution.
Hapgood, Norman-Abraham Lincoln.
Johnson, W. H. The World's Discoverers.
Lytton, Bulwer-Rienzi, the Last of the Tribunes.
Motley, J. L.-The Siege of Leyden.
Page, Thomas Nelson-The Burial of the Guns ; and Other Stories,
Porter, Jane-Thaddeus of Warsaw and Scottish Chiefs.
Thompson, D. P. Green Mountain Boys.
Tomlinson, E. T.-Boys of Old Monmouth.
Wallace, Lewis-Ben-Hur; A Tale of the Christ.
Warren, H. P. Stories From English History.
472
W
VOLUME VIII
ANIMAL AND NATURE STORIES
E have in this volume a great variety of tales dealing with external nature and the lives of animals.
In such matters the normal child has a spontaneous interest, which in the country expresses itself in
endless explorations and collections, with all their attendant educational advantages in the training of observation and resource. But not all children live in the country, and
even in the country children cannot always be in the woods.
Tales such as the present are in part a substitute for country life, in part a supplement to it. They supply information about the habits of animals and the like, they rouse
curiosity, they sharpen observation. A boy reads in a
story of some characteristic of a familiar animal which
he has never noticed: next time he sees it with different
eyes.
On the intellectual side, few qualities are more worth cultivating than this of keen first-hand observation, and a child's
natural interest in animals supplies the obvious starting-point
for its development.
But these stories have another function than that of
entertaining and piquing curiosity. Most of them deal with
the brute creation in a humanitarian spirit, and, without
sacrificing truth to nature, are calculated to put the reader
into a sympathetic attitude toward animals. Here, again,
the imagination is called into beneficent operation, with the
result of a widening of the child's emotional and sympathetic range. You can tell almost as much, though different things, about a man from the way he treats a dog
as from the way he meets a man; and any discipline which
473
READING GUIDE
refines as does training in the proper treatment of animals
is well worth while.
The danger of much modern writing about animals is
sentimentality. The brutes are used as occasions for the
enjoyment of pathetic emotions, often without regard for
truth to nature, or the effect of such cheap pathos on the
reader. A sympathetic attitude such as is implied in the
stories in this volume is to be distinguished from such
sentimentality. More and more knowledge of natural history, such as this book is meant to create an appetite for,
will check foolish emotion without destroying kindliness,
and beget a real respect for animal intelligence and anima!
rights.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Aiken, Dr., and Barbauld, Mrs.-Eyes and No Eyes, and Other Stories.
Bass, Florence-Animal Life.
Bass, Florence-Plant Life.
Brown, Dr. John-Rab and His Friends.
Burroughs, J.-Ways of Nature.
Cochrane, Robert-Four Hundred Animal Stories.
Davis, Richard Harding-Bar Sinister.
De la Ramée (Ouida)-The Dog of Flanders.
Eastman, C. A.-The Red Hunters and the Animal People,
Eckstorm, Fannie Hardy-The Bird Book.
Hamerton, Philip G.-Chapters on Animals.
Harris, Joel Chandler-Uncle Remus.
Holder, C. F.-The Ivory King.
Hulbert, William D.-Forest Neighbors.
Ingersoll, Ernest-Wild Neighbors.
Jordan, David Starr.--True Tales of Birds and Beasts.
Jordan, D. S., Kellogg, V. L., and Heath, H.-Animals.
Kipling, Rudyard-Jungle Books.
Knox, Thomas W.-Horse Stories.
Lang, Andrew-The Red Book of Animal Stories.
Lockwood, Samuel-Animal Memoirs.
London, Jack-The Call of the Wild.
Melville, Hermann-Typee: Life in the South Seas.
Miller, Olive Thorn-Little Brothers of the Air.
Sewell, Anna-Black Beauty.
Smith, F.-World of Animals.
White, S. E.-The Forest.
i
474
T
VOLUME IX
STORIES OF TO- DAY
HE first part of this volume consists of stories by modern writers dealing mainly with life in our own
day. They are, of course, meant for the older children, and both the style and the situations call for more
maturity on the part of the reader. The lure of the extraordinary is now dispensed with, and instead these tales
supply the interest that comes from recognizable truth to
experience.
When a boy reaches a certain stage in his development
he is apt to become impatient of the fantastic and impossible in fiction. The sense of fact which his everyday life
and most of his study in school have been cultivating finally
becomes the dominant element, and it tends to reject summarily all that offends it. For some years now the physical is in the ascendant, and the child is passing through
the most precarious period of his life. The imaginative
and ideal elements were never more important than at this
time, and yet these are precisely what he is most likely to
reject in his reading. The lavish use of such qualities in
the books of his earlier years is now merely irritating to
him, and a substitute is urgently needed.
It is at this point that wholesome modern fiction of a
more realistic type can serve a lofty educational purpose.
The care of the best modern writers of fiction for accuracy
of detail, for faithfulness to local color, for technical exactness in the description of both internal and external matters, appeals to a youth just beginning to pride himself on
his grasp of reality, and lays him open to whatever else the
writer may have to offer. What these stories have to give 475
READING GUIDE
is a number of pictures of life, presented vividly and con- vincingly, and in proportion to their truth and vigor serving as a kind of vicarious experience. The reading of such
fiction, with a lively realization of the scenes and characters,
is not only an exercise of the imagination abundantly rewarded
by the pleasure obtained, but is also amoral gymnastic, through
its stretching and supplying of the capacity for sympathy
with one's fellows.
The list of fiction contained in these volumes, representing the imaginative product of almost all races and times,
is fitly closed by the gift made to the children of England of
a story for themeslves by the master of English novelists,
William Makepeace Thackeray.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Bacon, Josephine Daskam-The Madness of Philip.
Brown, Abbie Farwell-The Lonesomest Doll.
Churchill, Winston-Richard Carvel.
Collins, Wilkie-The Moonstone.
Craik, Mrs. M. D. John Halifax, Gentleman.
Doyle, Arthur Conan-Adventures of Sherlock Holmes.
Ebers, George-Egyptian Princess.
Garland, Hamlin-Captain of the Gray-Horse Troop.
Haggard, H. R.-King Solomon's Mines.
Halévy, Ludovic-Abbé Constantin.
Hope, Anthony-The Prisoner of Zenda.
Hope, Anthony-Rupert of Hentzau.
Jewett, Sarah O.-Deephaven.
Johnson, Owen-Stover At Yale.
Johnson, Owen-The Varmint.
King, Charles-Cadet Days.
Kipling, Rudyard-Kim.
Ollivant. Alfred--Bob, Son of Battle.
Page, Thomas Nelson-A Captured Santa Claus.
Parker, Gilbert-The Seats of the Mighty.
Pier, Arthur S.-The Jester of St. Timothy's.
Rice, Mrs. A. C.-Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch.
Russell , William C.-The Wreck of the Grosvenor.
Seton, Ernest Thompson-Biography of a Grizzly.
Stevenson, Robert Louis-Kidnapped.
Tarkington, Booth-Monsieur Beaucaire.
Webster, Jean-When Patty Went to College.
Wiggin, Kate Douglas-Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm.
476
T
VOLUMEX
POEMS OLD AND NEW
THE previous volumes have provided roughly a progression from the simplest fairy tales to modern fic- tion not written primarily for young people. The wise guide will, of course, not follow this order slavishly,
but will pick and choose in accordance with the taste of
the individual child. For, in spite of the stress that has
been laid in these remarks on the educative value, intellectual and moral, of the stories, it must never be forgotten
that whatever ulterior end literature may serve, it must
do it by pleasing. If, then, any selection, however delightful to the adult, fails to entertain the child, it should be
laid aside for a later time. The material here gathered is
to be regarded not as a means of discipline, but as a source
of joy; and anything that would introduce unpleasant associations with these volumes should be avoided as endangering the main ends they are created to serve.
If this is true of the prose, it is still more true of the
poetry. Indeed, there is no excuse here for either tedium or labor, so rich is the variety, so wide the range. The
collection of poems begins with the simplest nursery rhymes,
to be said, or, better, sung to the child from its earliest
years, until it has them all by heart. The habit of committing verse to memory thus begun should be kept up throughout childhood, care being taken that the poems find
a lodgment not through drudgery but as the result of delighted repetition.
In this way a child may arrive at the end of his school- days to find himself in possession of a large body of
poetry, much of it from the pens of the greatest of our
477
READING GUIDE
writers. The profit of this in enjoyment, in the cultivation of the ear for the beauty of words and rhythms, in
the storing of the memory with fine phrases and noble
thoughts, in the familiarity with rich and elevated feeling,
has been pointed out by Mr. Eliot in the Introduction, and
need not be further urged here. Something of the best and
most delightful of such poets as Shakespeare, Milton, Dry- den, Burns, Coleridge, Wordsworth, Scott, Byron, Keats,
Tennyson, Browning, Longfellow, and Emerson will be
found, along with the most exquisite of the simpler products of minor pens. The table is spread with abundance:
these notes are meant merely to give hints for serving the
feast.
LIST OF BEST BOOKS
Book of Old English Ballads.
Bryant, William Cullen-A New Library of Poetry and Song.
Coates, Henry T.-The Children's Book of Poetry.
Eggleston, George Cary-American War Ballads and Lyrics.
Eliot, Samuel-Poetry for Children.
Gilder, Jeannette L.-The Heart of Youth.
Ingpen, Roger-One Thousand Poems for Children.
Jordan, Charlotte Brewster-Mother-Song and Child-Song.
Knight, William-The Poets on Christmas.
Knowles, Frederic Lawrence-A Treasury of Humorous Poetry.
Lang, Andrew-The Blue Poetry Book.
Lovejoy, Mary I.-Nature in Verse.
Lucas, Edward Verrall-A Book of Verses for Children.
Lucas, Edward Verrall-Another Book of Verses for Children.
Our Children's Songs.
Paget, R. L.-Poems of American Patriotism.
Palgrave, Francis Turner-Golden Treasury.
Patmore, Coventry-The Children's Garland from the Best Poets.
Repplier, Agnes-A Book of Famous Verse.
Stedman, Edmund Clarence-An American Anthology, 1787-1900.
Stedman, Edmund Clarence-A Victorian Anthology, 1837-1895.
Thacher, Lucy W.-The Listening Child.
Tileston, Mary Wilder-The Child's Harvest of Verse.
Whittier, John Greenleaf-Child Life.
Wiggin, Kate Douglas, and Smith, Nora Archibald-Pinafore Palace.
478
JUNIOR CLASSICS CONTENTS
ARRANGED ACCORDING TO GRADES
WILLIAM ALLAN NEILSON, PH. D.
President Smith College, Northampton, Mass., formerly Professor of English, Harvard University
T
HE following lists represent an attempt to
arrange the contents of The Junior Classics to
fit successive degrees of maturity. The basis
adopted is that of the eight grades of the American
public school, and many of the selections are those
recommended for the various grades in prescribed
courses of study. It is clear, of course, that between the groups of material suggested for these
classes no hard lines can be drawn ; neither children nor books submit to rigid classification. Some
fifth-grade boys can enjoy seventh-grade stories,
and many stories and poems appeal to all grades
of boys. Yet it may facilitate the use of these
volumes to have indicated to which pieces a reader
of a given age may be first introduced. Once the
door has been opened, it is safe to prophesy that
the young reader will find his way in this rich
storehouse for himself.
479
CONTENTS ACCORDING TO GRADES
GRADE I
The Ugly Duckling-Hans C. Andersen, I, 294 The Tinder-Box-Hans C. Andersen, I, 307 The Constant Tin Soldier-Hans C. Andersen, I, 317 The Fir Tree-Hans C. Andersen, I, 323 The Flying Trunk-Hans C. Andersen, I, 334 The Darning Needle-Hans C. Andersen, I, 343 Cinderella-Miss Mulock, I, 350 Little Red Riding-Hood-Charles Perrault, I, 359 The Story of the Three Bears-Robert Southey, I, 369 Jack the Giant-Killer-Joseph Jacobs, I, 374 Tom Thumb-Joseph Jacobs, I, 381 Beauty and the Beast-Mme. d'Aulnoy, I, 426 Jack and the Beanstalk-Anonymous, I, 444 Hop-o'-My-Thumb-Joseph Jacobs, I, 458 The Crow and the Pitcher-Esop, I, 498 The Lion and the Mouse-Esop, I, 508
The Tale of Peter Rabbit-Beatrix Potter, VIII, 443 The Giraffe-Anonymous, VIII, 458
NURSERY RHYMES
GRADE I-POEMS
Sing a Song of Sixpence-Anonymous, X, 21 A Diller, A Dollar-Anonymous, X, 21
Simple Simon-Anonymous onymous.Χ, 22 , A,
Little Boy Blue-Anonymous, X, 22 Daffy-Down-Dilly-Anonymous, X, 29 Little Nancy Etticote-Anonymous, X, 22 When I Was a Bachelor-Anonymous, X, 23 Great A, Little a-Anonymous, X, 23 Pussy-Cat, Pussy-Cat-Anonymous, X, 23 Higgley Piggley-Anonymous, X, 23 Humpty Dumpty-Anonymous, X, 24 Curly Locks!-Anonymous, X, 24 The North Wind Doth Blow-Anonymous, X, 24 Jack Sprat-Anonymous, X, 24 Come Let's to Bed-Anonymous, X, 24 Pease Pudding Hot-Anonymous, X, 25 Solomon Grundy-Anonymous, X, 25 Ding, Dong, Bell-Anonymous, X, 25 There Was an Old Woman Toss'd Up in a Basket-Anony- mous, X, 26 Little Miss Muffet-Anonymous, X, 26
Diddle Hey! Diddle, Diddle-Anonymous, X, 26 This Is the Way the Ladies Ride-Anonymous, X, 27 Little Bo-Peep-Anonymous, X, 27 Old King Cole-Anonymous, X, 28 Jack and Jill-Anonymous, X, 28 Little Polly Flinders-Anonymous, X, 98 To Market, to Market, to Buy a Fat Pig-Anonymous, X, 28
:
480
NURSERY RHYMES-Continued
The Queen of Hearts-Anonymous, X, 29 Blow, Wind, Blow! and Go, Mill, Go! Anonymous, X, 29 Diddle, Diddle Dumpling, My Son John-Anonymous, X, 29 There Was an Old Woman Who Lived in a Shoe-Anony- mous, X, 29 Goosey, Goosey, Gander-Anonymous, X, 30 Ride a Cock-Horse-Anonymous, X, 30 Where Are You Going, My Pretty Maid?-Anonymous, X, 30 Baby Dear, Good Night, Good Night-Anonymous, X, 31 Kind Hearts Are Gardens-Anonymous, X, 31 I Had a Little Pony-Anonymous, X, 31 Taffy Was a Welshman-Anonymous, X, 31 Hushaby, Baby, Thy Cradle Is Green-Anonymous, X, 33 There Is Very Little Trouble-Anonymous, X, 32 Mistress Mary, Quite Contrary-Anonymous, X, 32 Hearts, Like Doors, Will Open With Ease-Anonymous,
Χ, 32
Weather Song-Anonymous, X, 33 The Old Woman Who Bought a Pig-Anonymous, X, 33 The Three Little Kittens-Anonymous, Χ, 37 Pussy-Jane Taylor, X, 38 Mother Hubbard and Her Dog--Anonymous, X, 39
GRADE II
The Boy and the Wolves-Andrew Lang, I, 42 The Indian Who Lost His Wife-Andrew I ang, Ι, 45 The Tiger, the Brahman, and the Jackal-Flora Annie Steel,
I, 82 The Lambikin-Flora Annie Steel, I, 86 The Rat's Wedding-Flora Annie Steel, I, 89 The Jackal and the Partridge-Flora Annie Steel, 1, 98 The Jackal and the Crocodile-Flora Annie Steel, I, 102 The Jackal and the Iguana-Flora Annie Steel, I. 106 The Bear's Bad Bargain-Flora Annie Steel, I, 109 The Thief and the Fox-Ramaswami Raju, I, 114 The Farmer and the Fox-Ramaswami Raju, I, 115 The Fools and the Drum-RamaswamiiRaju R , I, 116 The Lion and the Goat-Ramaswami Raju, I, 117 The Glowworm and the Jackdaw-Ramaswami Raju, 1, 118 The Camel and the Pig-Ramaswami Raju, I, 119 The Dog and the Dog Dealer-Ramaswami Raju, I, 120 The Tiger, the Fox, and the Hunters-Ramaswami Raju, I, 121 The Sea, the Fox, and the Wolf-Ramaswami Raju, I, 122 The Fox in the Well-Ramaswami Raju, I, 123
TALES FROM NORSELAND Ashiepattle and His Goodly Crew-P. C. Asbjörnsen, I, 125 The Squire's Bride-P. C. Asbjörnsen, I , 136 The Doll in the Grass-P. C. Asbjörnsen, I, 140 The Bear and the 1 ox-P. C. Asbjörnsen, I, 142 The Lad Who Went to the North Wind-Sir George W. Dasent, I, 147
The Husband Who Was to Mind the House-Sir George W. Dasent, I, 151
481
TALES FROM NORSELAND-Continued
How One Went Out to Woo-Sir George W. Dasent, I, 154 Why the Bear Is Stumpy-Tailed-Sir George W. Dasent, I, 155 Boots Who Made the Princess Say: "That's a Story"-Sir George W. Dasent, I, 156 Thumbling-W. and J. Grimm, I, 272 Snow-White and Rose-Red-W. and J. Grimm, I, 285 The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood-Charles Perrault, I, 405 The Goose-Girl-Anonymous, I, 470
THE FABLES OF ÆSOP
The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse-Esop, I, 493 The Man, Boy, and Donkey-Æsop, I, 494 The Shepherd's Boy-Æsop, I, 495
Androcles-Æsop, I , 496 The Fox and the Stork-Æsop, I, 497 The Crow and the Pitcher-Æsop, I, 498 The Frogs Desiring a King-Esop, I, 499
The Frog and the Ox-Æsop, I, 500
The Cock and the Pearl-Esop, I, 501 The Fox Without a Tail-Esop, I, 501
The Fox and the Cat-Esop, I, 502 The Dog in the Manger-Æsop, I, 503 The Fox and the Goat-Æsop, I, 503 Belling the Cat-Esop, I, 504 The Jay and the Peacock-Æsop, I, 505 The Ass and the Lap-Dog-Esop, I, 505 The Ant and the Grasshopper-Æsop, I, 506 The Woodman and the Serpent-Æsop, I, 507
The Milkmaid and Her Pail-Esop, I, 507 The Lion and the Mouse-Esop, I, 508 Hercules and the Wagoner-Æsop, I, 509
The Lion's Share-Esop, I, 509 The Fox and the Crow-Esop, I, 510 The Dog and the Shadow-Esop, I, 511 The Wolf and the Lamb, Æsop, I, 511 The Bat, Birds, and Beasts-Esop, I, 512 The Belly and the Members-Esop, I, 513 The Fox and the Grapes-Esop, I, 513 The Swallow and the Birds-Esop, I, 514 Lions and Tigers-Anonymous, VIII, 447 Apes and Monkeys-Anonymous, VIII, 453 The Hippopotamus and the Rhinoceros-Anonymous, VIII, 456 Poems, X, 41-60
GRADE II-POEMS
The Sleepy Song-Josephine D. Bacon, X, 41 Twenty Froggies-George Cooper, X, 42 A Child's Even Song-Richard Le Gallienne, X, 43 Old Gaelic Lullaby-Anonymous, X, 44 Sleep, Baby, Sleep !-Anonymous, X, 44 Lady Button-Eyes-Eugene Field, X, 45 The Rock-a-by Lady-Eugene Field, X, 47
482
The New Moon-Anonymous, X, 48 The Spider and the Fly-Mary Howitt, X, 49 The Sugar-Plum Tree-Eugene Field, X, 52 Young Night-Thought-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 53 Lullaby of an Infant Chief-Sir Walter Scott, X, 54 Sweet and Low-Alfred Tennyson, X, 55 Wynken, Blynken, and Nod-Eugene Field, X, 55 Cuddle Down, Dolly-Kate Douglas Wiggin, X, 57 The Shut-Eye Train-Eugene Field, X, 58 A Mortifying Mistake-Anna Maria Pratt, X, 60
GRADE III
TALES OF THE AMERICAN INDIANS
Manabozho-H. R. Schoolcraft, I, 19
Why the Diver Duck Has so Few Tail Feathers-H. R. Schoolcraft, I, 26
Manabozho Is Changed Into a Wolf-H. R. Schoolcraft, I, 28 Why the Woodpecker Has Red Head Feathers-H. R. School- craft, I, 31
Manabozho Is Robbed by the Wolves-H. R. Schoolcraft, I, 36
TALES FROM INDIA
Punchkin-E. Frere, I, 48
How Sun, Moon, and Wind Went Out to Dinner-E. Frere,
I, 65
TALES FROM CHINA AND JAPAN
Hok Lee and the Dwarfs-Andrew Lang, I, 238 A Dreadful Boar-Adele M. Fielde, I, 244
The Five Queer Brothers-Adele M. Fielde, I, 247 The Accomplished and Lucky Teakettle-A. B. Mitford, I, 951 The Adventures of Little Peachling-A. B. Mitford, I, 253 The Two Lizards-Annie Ker, I, 256 Hansel and Grethel-W. and J. Grimm, I, 262 The Six Swans-W. and J. Grimm, I, 279 Puss in Boots-Charles Perrault, I, 367
Blue Beard-Charles Perrault, I, 388
The Brave Little Tailor-Anonymous, I, 394 The Fair One with Golden Locks-Miss Mulock, I, 419 He Who Knew Not Fear-Anonymous, I, 478 A Story of Decoration Day for the Little Children of To-day- Elizabeth Harrison, IX, 23 Poems X, 61-116
GRADE III-POEMS
Willie Winkie-William Miller, X, 63
The Giant-Charles Mackay, X, 64 Marjorie's Almanac-Thomas B. Aldrich, X, 65 Who Stole the Bird's Nest ? L. Maria Child, X, 67 How the Leaves Came Down-Susan Coolidge, X, 70 Try Again-Anonymous, X, 71 Blowing Bubbles-William Allingham, X, 72 Baby Bye-Theodore Tilton, X, 73 A Baby's Feet-A. C. Swinburne, X, 76 The Fairy Folk-William Allingham, X, 77
Jun. Cl-10 483 16
The Vowels: An Enigma-Jonathan Swift, X, 79 The Children's Hour-H. W. Longfellow, X, 79 Small and Early-Tudor Jenks, X, 81 Advice-Anonymous, X, 82 Robin Goodfellow-Anonymous, X, 84 Suppose-Phœbe Cary, X, 86 To-day-Thomas Carlyle, X, 87 My Shadow-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 88 The Lost Doll-Charles Kingsley, X, 89 Time to Rise-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 90
The Swing-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 90 Happy Thought-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 91 The Lamplighter-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 91 O Little Town of Bethlehem-Phillips Brooks, X, 99 Picture-Books in Winter-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 93 The Land of Story-Books-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 94 Christmas-Alfred Tennyson, X, 95 The Land of Counterpane-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 96
Block City-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 97 The Dancers-Michael Field, X, 98 Marching Song-Robert L. Stevenson, Χ, 98 Winter-Time-Robert L. Stevenson, Χ, 99
Foreign Lands-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 100 The Owl and the Pussy-Cat-Edward Lear, X, 101 Foreign Children-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 102 A Visit from St. Nicholas-Clement C. Moore, 103 Three Kings of Orient-J. H. Hopkins, X, 105 Bed in Summer-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 106
My Bed Is a Boat-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 106 The Walrus and the Carpenter-I ewis Carroll, X, 107 The Table and the Chair-Edward Lear, X, 111 A Good Play-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 112 God Rest Ye, Merry Gentlemen-Dinah Maria Mulock, X, 118 A Lobster-Quadrille-Lewis Carroll, X, 114 Young Dandelion-Dinah Maria Mulock, X, 115
TALES FROM INDIA
GRADE IV
Why the Fish Laughed-Joseph Jacobs, I, 67 The Farmer and the Money Lender-Joseph Jacobs, I, 75 Pride Goeth Before a Fall-Joseph Jacobs, I, 78
How the Wicked Sons Were Duped-Joseph Jacobs, I, 81 The Witch in the Stone Boat-Andrew Lang, I, 158
TALES FROM FRANCE. SPAIN, AND POLAND
The Snuffbox-Paul Sébillot, I, 166 The Golden Blackbird-Paul Sébillot, I, 172 The Half-Chick-Andrew I ang, I, 180 The Three Brothers-Hermann R. Kletke, I, 186
The Glass Mountain-Hermann R. Kletke, I, 190
TALES FROM RUSSIA
Huntsman the Unlucky-John T. Naaké, I, 196 Story of I ittle Simpleton-John T. Naaké, I, 202
The Golden Fish-Lillian M. Gask, I, 209
484
TALES FROM SERBIA The Wonderful Hair-W. S. Karajich, I, 213 The Language of Animals-W. S. Karajich, I, 216 The Emperor Trojan's Goat's Ears-W. S. Karajich, I, 223
The Maiden Who was Wiser than the King-W. S. Karajich,
I, 226
TALES OF ROBIN HOOD-IV, 331-378
Wild Robin-Sophie May, VI, 106
Uncle David's Nonsensical Story-Catherine Sinclair, VI, 362 The Grand Feast-Catherine Sinclair, VI, 374 The Story of Fairyfoot-Frances Browne, VI, 391 The Katy-Did's Party-Harriet B. Stowe, VIII, 305 The Beech and the Oak-Carl Ewald, VIII , 312
The Mist-Carl Ewald, VIII, 336 The Anemones-Carl Ewald, VIII, 343 The Weeds-Carl Ewald, VIII, 351
The Little Baxters Go Marketing-Tudor Jenks, IX, 18 Poems, X, 117-158 GRADE IV-POEMS
John Gilpin-William Cowper, X, 117 The Flowers-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 126 The Duel-Eugene Field, X, 127 Little Orphant Annie-James W. Riley, X, 128 Ready for Duty-Anna B. Warner, X, 131 Thanatopsis-William C. Bryant, X, 132 Heaving of the Lead-Charles Dibdin, X, 135 Morning-James Beattie, X, 136 The Coral Grove James G. Percival, X, 137 The Jumblies---Edward Lear, X, 138
The Man in The Moon-James W. Riley, X, 141 The Raggedy Man-James W. Riley, X, 143 The Dinkey-Bird-Eugene Field, X, 145 Hollyhock-Sarah J. Day, X, 146 The Pied Piper of Hamelin-Robert Browning, X, 147 Waiting Around-Burges Johnson, X, 157 Wishing-William Allingham, X, 158
GRADE V
De King and De Peafowl-Mary P. Milne-Horne, I, 259 The Legend of Saint Christopher-Lillian M. Gask, II, 187 Prince Ivan and the Gray Wolf-Lillian M. Gask, II, 195
MYTHS OF GREECE AND ROME
The Riddle of the Sphinx-Elsie F. Buckley, II, 222 The Gift of Athene-Sir George W. Cox, II , 250 Daphne Child of the Morning-Sir George W. Cox, II, 253 The Vengeance of Apollo-Sir George W. Cox, II, 255 The Story of Arion-Sir George W. Cox, II, 261
ANIMAL MYTHS
The Hare Who Thought the World Had Come to an End- H. N. Francis, II, 430 The Watering of the Saplings-Rev. W. H. D. Rouse, II, 493 The Old Hare and the Elephants-Sir Edwin Arnold, II, 434 The Elephant Has a Bet With the Tiger-Walter Skeat,
II, 436
485
ANIMAL MYTHS-Continued
How the Tortoise Out-ran the Deer-C. F. Hartt, II, 441 Which Was the Stronger, the Tortoise, the Tapir, or the Whale?-C. F. Hartt, II, 444 How the Turtle Got His Shell-Annie Ker, II, 446 The Legend of Rata-Sir George Grey, II, 450 Why the Hippopotamus Lives in the Water-Elphinstone Dayrell, II , 455 Why the Elephant Has Small Eyes-Elphinstone Dayrell,
II, 457 The Boy Who Set a Snare for the Sun-H. R. Schoolcraft,
II, 460 Brownie and the Cook-Mrs. Dinah M. Craik, VI, 139 Brownie and the Cherry Tree-Mrs. Dinah M. Craik, VI, 149 The Ouphe of the Wood-Jean Ingelow, VI, 156 The Prince's Dream-Jean Ingelow, VI, 171 A Lost Wand-Jean Ingelow, VI, 183 Snap-Dragons-A Tale of Christmas Eve-Juliana H. Ewing,
VI, 213
The Two Gifts-Lillian M. Gask, VI, 354 The Bar of Gold-Lillian M. Gask, VI, 357
ALICE IN WONDERLAND-VI, 409-505 The Butterfly's Children-Mrs. Alfred Gatty, VIII, 254 The Dragon-Fly and the Water-Lily-Carl Ewald, VIII, 261 The Queen Bee-Carl Ewald, VIII, 279
The Oak and the Snail-Mrs. Alfred Gatty, VIII, 321 The Story of a Stone-David Starr Jordan, VIII, 325 How the Stone-Age Children Played-Charles C. Abbott, VIII,
331
Some Voices From the Kitchen Garden-Mrs. Alfred Gatty,
VIII, 359 The Wind and the Flowers-Mrs. Alfred Gatty, VIII, 369 The Idea That Went Astray-Pauline C. Bouvé, IX, 168
GRADE V-POEMS
Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard-Thomas Grey, X, 159 Crocus-Sarah J. Day, X, 164 To a Waterfowl-William C. Bryant, X, 163 The Brown Thrush-Lucy Larcom, X, 166 The Blue Jay-Susan Hartley Swett, X, 167 The Bluebird-Emily H. Miller, X, 168 The Nightingale and Glowworm-William Cowper, X, 169 The Lark and the Rook-Anonymous, X, 170 The Owl-Alfred Tennyson, X, 171 Robert of Lincoln-William C. Bryant, X, 172 To the Lady-Bird-Mrs. Southey, X, 174 The Grasshopper and Cricket-Leigh Hunt, X, 175 The Ant and the Cricket-Anonymous, X, 176 The Housekeeper-Charles Lamb, X, 177 Song-Alfred Tennyson, X, 178 The Grasshopper and Cricket-John Keats, X, 178 Keeping Store-Mary F. Butts, X, 179 The Kitten and Falling Leaves-William Wordsworth, X, 179 What the Wind Brings-Edmund C. Stedman, X, 180
486
The Wind-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 181 Who Has Seen the Wind ?-Christina G. Rossetti, X, 189 Wind-Song-Nora Hopper, X, 182 Windy Nights-Robert L. Stevenson, X, 183 The Wind and the Moon-George MacDonald, X, 184 Sleigh Song-G. W. Pettee, X, 186 Come, Little Leaves-George Cooper, X, 187 Seven Times One-Jean Ingelow, X. 188
A Pitcher of Mignonette-H. C. Bunner, X, 189 Signs of Rain-Dr. Edward Jenner, X, 190 ABoy's Song-James Hogg, X, 191 Farm-Yard Song-J. T. Trowbridge, X, 199 The Milkmaid-Jeffreys Taylor, X, 194 Hiawatha's Childhood-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 196 Seven Times Two-Jean Ingelow, X, 199
GRADE VI
STORIES FROM NORTHERN SAGAS-II , 9-91 King Robert of Sicily-Henry W. Longfellow, II, 218 The Bird Lover-Cornelius Mathews, II, 465 Wunzh, the Father of Indian Corn-Cornelius Mathews, II, 479 The Four Seasons-Lillian M. Gask, II , 493
The Three Lemons-Lillian M. Gask, II, 500 The Winter-Spirit and His Visitor-Cornelius Mathews, II, 519
OLD GREEK TALES
How Theseus Slays the Minotaur-Nathaniel Hawthorne, III, 18 Pegasus, the Winged Horse-Nathaniel Hawthorne, III, 51 The Heroes Sail Away in Search of the Golden Fleece- Charles Kingsley, III, 80 How Jason Lost His Sandal-Charles Kingsley, III, 88 How They Built the Ship Argo-Charles Kingsley, III, 98 How the Argonauts Sailed to Colchis-Charles Kingsley,
III, 102 Hunting the Calydonian Boar-Elsie F. Buckley, III, 128 The Winning of Atalanta-Elsie F. Buckley, III, 148 Turning Everything Into Gold-Nathaniel Hawthorne, III, 179 The Pomegranate Seeds-Nathaniel Hawthorne, III, 193
TALES FROM EARLY ENGLISH CHRONICLES-IV, 135-189
ARABIAN NIGHTS
Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves, V, 15 The Story of Aladdin; or the Wonderful Lamp, V, 46 Sindbad the Sailor, V, 108
GULLIVER'S TRAVELS-V, 249-312 A Midsummer-Night's Dream-E. Nesbit, V, 331 The Tempest-E. Nesbit, V, 338 As You Like It-E. Nesbit, V, 345 The Merchant of Venice-E. Nesbit, V, 351 Nelly's Hospital-Louisa M. Alcott, VI, 25 The Flight of the Dolls-Lucretia P. Hale, VI, 94 Solomon John Goes for Apples-Lucretia P. Hale, VI, 102 Dill-Mary E. W. Freeman, VI, 128 Uncle Jack's Story-Mrs. E. M. Field, VI, 241
487
Bryda's Dreadful Scrape-Mrs. E. M. Field, VI, 959 Embellishment-Jacob Abbott, VI, 978 The Great Stone Face-Nathaniel Hawthorne, VI, 903
PHIL'S ADVENTURES AMONG THE ANIMALS
At Home with the Beavers-Lillian M. Gask, VIII, 381
Two Enemies of the Beavers-Lillian M. Gask, VIII, 393 The Squirrel's Story-Lillian M. Gask, VIII, 406 A Den in the Rocks-Lillian M. Gask, VIII, 418 Ships of the Desert-Lillian M. Gask, VIII, 429 A Christmas Adventure-J. E. Chamberlin, IX, 55 The Travelling Doll-Evelyn Snead Barnett, IX, 137 The Call of the Sea-Frederick Palmer, IX, 201 On a Tight Rope-Albert W. Tolman, IX, 213 Down the Incline-Charles Newton Hood, IX, 220 Poems, X, 201-250 GRADE VI-POEMS
The Barefoot Boy-John G. Whittier, X, 201 Thanksgiving Day-Lydia Maria Child, X, 204 The Romance of the Swan's Nest-E. B. Browning, X, 205 The Voice of Spring-Mary Howitt, X, 209 Green Things Growing-Dinah Maria Mulock, X, 210 A Boy's Prayer-H. C. Beeching, X, 211 Daffodils-William Wordsworth, X, 211 Daffodil-Katherine T. Hinkson, X, 212 July-Susan Hartley Swett, X, 213 To the Fringed Gentian-William C. Bryant, X, 214 Summer Days-Anonymous, X, 215 Woodman, Spare That Tree !-George Pope Morris, X, 916 Daisy's Song-John Keats, X, 217 The Frost-Hannah Flagg Gould, X, 218 Almond Blossom-Edwin Arnold, X, 218 A Song of Clover-Saxe Holm, X, 220 A Storm in the Distance-Paul H. Hayne, X, 221 Seven Times Four-Jean Ingelow, X, 222 To a Skylark-Percy Bysshe Shelley, X, 223 Swimming-Lord Byron, X, 228 The Brook-Alfred Tennyson, X, 228 The Bugle Song-Alfred Tennyson, X, 230 The Brave Old Oak-H. F. Chorley, X, 231 Daybreak-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 232 The Meadows in Spring-Edward Fitzgerald,
Hiawatha's Sailing-Henry W. Longfellow,
Procession of the Flowers-Sydney Dobell, X, 239 The Tiger-William Blake, X, 240 A Sea Song-Allan Cunningham, X, 241 Song-Robert Browning, X, 242
X, 233 235
They Come: The Merry Summer Months-William Motherwell,
Χ. 242
Little Dandelion-Helen B. Bostwick, X, 245 The Day Is Gone-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 246 Sailor's Song-Thomas LL. Beddoes, X. 248 The Chambered Nautilus-Oliver W. Holmes, X, 249 Home, Sweet Home John Howard Payne, X, 250
488
THE STORY OF BRUNHILDA AND SIEGFRIED-II, 99-133
THE STORY OF LOHENGRIN-II , 141-171 When Brer Wolf Have His Corn Shucking-Anonymous, II, 487 Brer Rabbit's Cool Air Swing-Anonymous, II, 490 TALES OF THE TROJAN WAR-FROM HOMER
The Trojan War-Thomas Bulfinch, III, 237 The Quarrel of the Chiefs-Alfred J. Church, II, 240 The Fight Between Paris and Menelaus-Alfred J. Church,
III, 251
The Duel Between Hector and Ajax-Alfred J. Church, III,
257
The Deeds and Death of Patroclus-Alfred J. Church, III,
265
The Death of Hector-Alfred J. Church, III, 272 The Ransoming of Hector-Alfred J. Church, III, 283 The Wooden Horse-Grace Bigelow Patten, III, 295
THE HOMEWARD VOYAGE OF THE GREEK HERO, ULYSSES-FROM
HOMER
The Lotus-Eaters-Sir George W. Cox, III, 301 Ulysses and the Cyclops-Sir George W. Cox, III, 305 Circe's Palace-Nathaniel Hawthorne, III, 315 Ulysses and the Sirens-Sir George W. Cox, III , 353 Nausicaa Rescues Ulysses-Alfred J. Church, III , 357 Ulysses and the Swineherd-Alfred J. Church, III, 368 The Return of Telemachus-Alfred J. Church, III, 373 Ulysses in His Home-Alfred J. Church, III, 377 The Trial of the Bow-Alfred J. Church, III, 384 The Vengeance of Ulysses-Alfred J. Church, III, 389
THE WANDERINGS OF ENEAS FROM VIRGIL
The Remnant of the Defeated Army Seeks a New Home- Thomas Bulfinch and Alfred J. Church, III, 397 The Adventure with the Harpies-H. L. Havell, III , 403 Pursued by the Cyclops-H. L. Havell, III, 406 Venus Sends Æneas to Queen Dido-Alfred J. Church, III,
412
Queen Dido Welcomes Æneas-Alfred J. Church, III , 418 The Love and Death of Queen Dido-Alfred J. Church, III,
425
The Race of the Four Galleys-H. L. Havell, III, 437 The Foot Race-H. L. Havell, III, 443 The Boxing Match-H. L. Havell, III, 445 The Contest of the Archers-H. L. Havell, III, 448 The Sibyl Speaks to Æneas-Alfred J. Church, III , 450 The Dwellings of the Dead-Alfred J. Church, III, 455 The Oracle Foretells the Coming of Eneas-H. L. Havell,
III, 467 Æneas and His Companions Eat Their Tables-H. L. Havell,
III, 469 The Fight Between Eneas and Turnus-H. L. Havell, III,
473
The Death of Turnus-H. L. Havell, III, 480
489
STORIES FROM ROMAN HISTORY-FROM LIVY
The Story of Romulus and Numa-Alfred J. Church, III, 489 The Story of Alba-Alfred J. Church, III, 500
THE STORY OF KING ARTHUR-IV, 13-68
ROBINSON CRUSOE-V, 159-222
The Race for the Silver Skates-Mary Mapes Dodge, VI, 7
AFox and a Raven-Rebecca H. Davis, VI, 46 The Private Theatricals-Mrs. A. D. T. Whitney, VI, 56 A Case of Coincidence-Rose Terry Cooke, VI, 83 Deacon Thomas Wale's Will-Mary E. W. Freeman, VI, 116
STORIES OF COURAGE AND HEROISM
How Phidias Helped the Image-Maker-Beatrice Harraden
VII, 11 The Fight at the Pass of Thermopyla-Charlotte M. Yonge,
VII, 17 The Bravery of Regulus-Charlotte M. Yonge, VII, 27 The Rabbi Who Found the Diadem-Dr. A. S. Isaacs, VII, 34 How Livia Won the Brooch-Beatrice Harraden, VII, 35 Julius Cæsar Crossing the Rubicon-Jacob Abbott, VII, 42 Fearless Saint Genevieve, Patron Saint of Paris-Charlotte М.
Yonge, VII, 60 The Boy Viking-Olaf II of Norway-E. S. Brooks, VII, 67 The Boy-Heroes of Crecy and Poitiers-Treadwell Walden,
VII, 87
The Noble Burghers of Calais-Charlotte M. Yonge, VII, 99 The Story of Joan of Arc, the Maid Who Saved France- Anonymous, VII, 118 How Joan the Maid Took Largess from the English-Anony- mous, VII, 130 Death of Joan the Maid-Anonymous, VII, 142 How Catherine Douglas Tried to Save King James of Scotland- Charlotte M. Yonge, VII, 149 The Brave Queen of Hungary-Charlotte M. Yonge, VII, 155 A Story of Christopher Columbus for Little Children-Elizabeth Harrison, VII, 166
A Sea-Fight in the Time of Queen Bess-Charles Kingsley,
VII, 179
A Brave Scottish Chief-Anonymous, VII, 205 The Adventure of Grizel Cochrane-Arthur Quiller-Couch,
VII, 214 The Sunken Treasure-Nathaniel Hawthorne, VII, 228
The Lost Exiles of Texas-Arthur Gilman, VII, 234 The Boy Conqueror ; Charles XII of Sweden-E. S. Brooks,
VII, 244 The True Story of a Kidnaped Boy as Told by Himself- Peter Williamson, VII, 265 The Prisoner Who Would Not Stay in Prison-Anonymous,
VII, 278 A White Boy Among the Indians as Told by Himself-John Tanner, VII, 292 Evangeline of Acadia-Henry W. Longfellow, VII, 306 Jabez Rockwell's Powder-Horn-Ralph D. Paine, VII, 317
490
STORIES OF COURAGE AND HEROISM-Continued
A Man Who Coveted Washington's Shoes-Frank R. Stockton,
VII, 332 A Famous Fight Between an English and a French Frigate- Rev. W. H. Fitchett, VII, 344 The Trick of an Indian Spy-Arthur Quiller-Couch, VII, 348 The Man in the "Auger Hole"-Frank R. Stockton, VII, 356 The Remarkable Voyage of the Bounty-Anonymous, VII,
366
The Two Boy Hostages of the Siege of Seringapatam- Anonymous, VII, 380 The Man Who Spoiled Napoleon's "Destiny"-Rev. W. H. Fitchett, VII, 385 A Fire- Fighter's Rescue from the Flames-Arthur QuillerCouch, VII, 396 How Napoleon Rewarded His Men-Baron de Marbot, VII,
403
A Rescue from Shipwreck-Arthur Quiller-Couch, VII, 418 Rebecca the Drummer-Charles Barnard, VII, 426 The Messenger-M. E. M. Davis, VII, 434 Humphry Davy and the Safety-Lamp-George C. Towle, VII
449
Kit Carson's Duel-Emerson Hough, VII, 454 The Story of Grace Darling--Anonymous Anonymous, VII, 468 The Struggles of Charles Goodyear-George C. Towle, VII,
475
Old Johnny Appleseed-Elizabeth Harrison, VII, 480 The Little Post-Boy-Bayard Taylor, VII, 485 How June Found Massa Linkum-Elizabeth S. Phelps, VII,
495
The Story of a Forest Fire-Raymond S. Spears, VII, 509 Powder-Post-C. A. Stephens, VIII, 267 The Taxes of Middlebrook-Ray Stannard Baker, IX, 30 The Cure of Fear-Norman Duncan, IX, 43 Big Timber Beacon-John L. Mathews, IX, 79 The Imp and the Drum-Josephine D. Bacon, IX, 99 Holding the Pipe-Albert W. Tolman, IX, 128 The Doll Doctor-E. V. Lucas, IX, 152
Jonnasen-Dallas Lore Sharp, IX, 179 In the Oven-Richard W. Childs, IX, 186
Poems, X, 251-340
GRADE VII-POEMS
Ye Mariners of England-Thomas Campbell, X, 251 Boyhood-Washington Allston, X, 252 Daisies-John Dryden, X, 253 March-Nora Hopper, X, 253 Succession of the Four Sweet Months-Robert Herrick, X, 254 March-William Wordsworth, X, 254 A Wayfaring Song-Henry Van Dyke, X, 255 Hark, Hark, the Lark-William Shakespeare, X, 256 The Arrow and the Song-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 250 The Sea-Barry Cornwall, X, 257 Small Beginnings-Charles Mackay, X, 258
491
Voyagers-Emily Dickinson, X, 260 Opportunity-Edward Rowland Hill, X, 260 Labor Song-Denis MacCarthy, X, 261 The Village Blacksmith-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 262 Life-James Russell Lowell, X, 264 The Happiest Heart-John Vance Cheney, X, 264 The Noble Nature-Ben Jonson, X, 265 Insignificant Existence-Isaac Watts, X, 265 For A' That-Robert Burns, X, 266 Procrastination-Robert Southwell, X, 267 Cardinal Wolsey's Speech to Cromwell-William Shakespeare, X,
268
Wolsey's Fall-William Shakespeare, X, 269 Seven Ages of Man-William Shakespeare, X, 270 Jog On-William Shakespeare, X, 271 Polonius's Advice William Shakespeare, X, 271 Reputation-William Shakespeare, X, 272 Over Hill, Over Dale-William Shakespeare, X, 279 I Know a Bank-William Shakespeare, X, 273 Ingratitude-William Shakespeare, X, 273 Where the Bee Sucks-William Shakespeare, X, 274 Mercy-William Shake Shakespeare, X, 274 Perfection-William Shakespeare, X, 275 The Pedler's Pack-William Shakespeare, X, 275 The Fairies' Lullaby-William Shakespeare, X, 276 Come Unto These Yellow Sands-William Shakespeare, 277
Opportunity-William Shakespeare, X, 278 Hotspur's Description of a Fop-William Shakespeare, X, 278 Buttercup-Jean Ingelow, X, 279 Knowledge-William Cowper, X, 280
To the Lord General Cromwell-John Milton, X, 280 The Rainbow-William Wordsworth, Χ, 281 On His Blindness-John Milton, X, 281 A Farewell-Charles Kingsley, X, 282 To Milton-William Wordsworth, X, 282 Perseverance-Edward Fitzgerald, X, 283 Retribution-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 283 The Gettysburg Address-Abraham Lincoln, X, 284 America-S. F. Smith, Χ. 285 The Star-Spangled Banner-Francis Scott Key, X, 286 Dixie-Daniel D. Emmett, X, 288 Rule Britannia-James Thomson, X, 289 The Watch on the Rhine-Max Schneckenburger, X, 290 The Marseillaise Hymn-Rouget de Lisle, X, 292 Swedish National Air, X, 293 National Hymn of Norway, X, 293 Italian National Hymn, X, 294 Danish National Hymn, X. 295
Spanish National Hymn. X, 296 Austrian National Song, X, 297 The Hand of I incoln-Edmund C. Stedman, X, 298
Battle-Hymn of the Republic-Julia Ward Howe, X, 300 The Flag Goes By-Henry H. Bennett, X, 301 Fatherland-Sir Walter Scott, X, 302
492
Warren's Address to the American Soldiers-John Pierpont,
X, 303 The Old Flag-H. C. Bunner, X, 304 Barbara Frietchie John G. Whittier, X, 305
Sheridan's Ride-Thomas B. Read, X, 308 The Republic-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 310 The Landing of the Pilgrim Fathers in New England-Felicia D. Hemans, X, 311 The Eve of Waterloo-Lord Byron, X, 318 Concord Hymn-R. W. Emerson, X, 314 O Captain ! My Captain !-Walt Whitman, X, 315 ANation's Strength-R. W. Emerson, X, 316 The Burial of Sir John Moore-Charles Wolfe, X, 317 Cavalry Song-Edmund C. Stedman, X, 319 On the Life-Mask of Abraham Lincoln-R. W. Gilder, X, 390 The Charge of the Light Brigade-Alfred Tennyson, Χ, 331 Paul Revere's Ride-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 323 Naseby-Thomas B. Macaulay, X, 327 How They Brought the Good News From Ghent to Aix-Robert Browning, X, 331 The Bowman's Song-Arthur Conan Doyle, X, 334 Old Ironsides-Oliver W. Holmes, X, 335 The Drum-Bret Harte, X, 336
Casabianca-Felicia D. Hemans, X, 338 Divine Ode-Joseph Addison, X, 339 The Character of a Happy Life-Sir Henry Wotton, X, 340
GRADE VIII
TWO TALES OF THE HUDSON
Rip Van Winkle-Washington Irving, II, 364 The Legend of Sleepy Hollow-Washington Irving, II, 386
THE MABINOGION
Kynon's Adventure at the Fountain-Lady Charlotte Guest,
IV, 79 Owain's Adventure at the Fountain-Lady Charlotte Guest,
IV, 85 Gawain's Adventure in Search of Owain-Lady Charlotte Guest, IV, 95 The Adventures of the Lion-Lady Charlotte Guest, IV, 99 How Pwyll Outwitted Gawl-Lady Charlotte Guest, IV, 104 How Manawyddan Caught a Thief-Lady Charlotte Guest,
IV, 112 The Story of Lludd and Llevelys-Lady Charlotte Guest IV, 125
TALES TOLD BY CHAUCER'S CANTERBURY PILGRIMS
The Old Woman and the Knight-F. J. H. Darton, IV, 201 Death and the Three Revellers-F. J. H. Darton, IV, 207 Patient Griselda-F. J. H. Darton, IV, 212
TALES FROM FRENCH AND ITALIAN CHRONICLES-V, 231-279 THE SPANISH CHRONICLES OF THE CID-IV, 289-321 DON QUIXOTE DE LA MANCHA-MIGUEL DE
385-509
PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, V, 361-392
CERVANTES-IV,
493
IVANHOE AND GUY MANNERING SIR WALTER Scorr Ivanhoe-Sir Edward Sullivan, V, 401 Guy Mannering-Sir Edward Sullivan, V, 458
THE STARTLING ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN-V, 505-513 The Cratchits' Christmas Dinner-Charles Dickens, VI, 267
Rab and His Friends-John Brown, M.D., VIII, 465 A Ride with a Mad Horse in a Freight Car-W. H. H. Murray,
VIII, 484 A-Hunting of the Deer-Charles D. Warner, VIII, 505 Brother Rabbit's Cradle-Joel Chandler Harris, IX, 7
Chased by the Trail-Jack London, IX, 66 How Hilda Got a School-Lelia Munsell, IX, 90 The Second String-James B. Connolly, IX, 116 Gravity Gregg-Isaac Ogden Rankin, IX, 171 On a Slide-Board-Robert Barnes, IX, 192 The Cost of Loving-Frederick O. Bartlett, IX, 225 Ladybird-Edith Barnard, IX, 241 The Drasnoe Pipe-Line-Arthur Stanwood Pier, IX, 255 Manuk Del Monte-Rowland Thomas, IX, 269 The Man Without a Country-Edward Everett Hale, IX, 279 The Foreman-Stewart E. White, IX, 315 The Gray Collie-Georgia W. Pangborn, IX, 328 The Fore-Room Rug-Kate Douglas Wiggin, IX, 340 Cressy's New-Year's Rent-Albert Lee, IX, 359
GRADE VIII-POEM3
The Rhodora, On Being Asked, "Whence is the Flower"-Ralph W. Emerson, X, 341
Laus Deo !-John G. Whittier, X, 342 The Colored Band-Paul L. Dunbar, X, 345 The Wind in a Frolic-William Howitt, X, 345 Ivry-Thomas B. MacCaulay, X, 347 The Heart of the Bruce William E. Aytoun, X, 351 Hervé Riel-Robert Browning, X, 360 The Destruction of Sennacherib-Lord Byron, X, 366 Incident of the French Camp-Robert Browning, Χ, 367 Horatius at the Bridge-Thomas B. MacCaulay, X, 369 After Blenheim-Robert Southey, X, 383 Lady Clare-Alfred Tennyson, X, 385 The Greenwood Shrift-Robert and Caroline Southey, Χ, 389 The Arab to His Favorite Steed-Caroline E. Norton, X, 393 The Old Oaken Bucket-Samuel Woodworth, X, 396 Lochinvar-Sir Walter Scott, X, 397 The Skeleton in Armor-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 399 The Deserted Village-Oliver Goldsmith, X, 405 The Wreck of the Hesperus-Henry W. Longfellow, X, 420 The Rime of the Ancient Mariner-Samuel T. Coleridge, X, 493 The Bells-Edgar Allan Poe, X, 447
494
:
INDEX OF AUTHORS

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Titles of Poems are printed in italics. Volumes are indicated
Abbott, Charles C.
bybold-face figures.
How the Stone-Age Children Played, 8, 331 Abbott, Jacob Embellishment, 6, 278
Julius Cæsar Crossing the Ru- bicon, 7, 42
Addison, Joseph
Divine Ode, 10, 339 Esop's Fables
The Town Mouse and the
Country Mouse, 1, 493 The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey, 1, 494 The Shepherd's Boy, 1, 495 Androcles, 1, 496
The Fox and the Stork, 1, 497 The Crow and the Pitcher, 1,
498
The Frogs Desiring a King, 1,
499
The Frog and the Ox, 1, 500 The Fox Without a Tail, 1,
501
The Cock and the Pearl, 1,
501
The Fox and the Cat, 1, 502 The Dog in the Manger, 1, 503 The Fox and the Goat, 1, 508
Belling the Cat, 1, 504 The Jay and the Peacock, 1,
505
The Ass and the Lap-Dog, 1,
505
Æsop's Fables
The Lion and the Mouse, 1,
508
The Lion's Share, 1, 509 Hercules and the Wagoner, 1,
509
The Fox and the Crow, 1, 510
The Wolf and the Lamb, 1,
511
The Dog and the Shadow, 1,
511
The Bat, the Birds, and the
Beasts, 1, 512 The Belly and the Members, 1,
513
The Fox and the Grapes, 1,
513
The Swallow and the Other
Birds, 1, 514 Alcott, Louisa M. Nelly's Hospital, 6, 95 Aldrich, Thomas Bailey
Marjorie's Almanac, 10, 65
Allingham, William
Blowing Bubbles, 10, 72
The Fairy Folk. 10, 77 Wishing, 10, 158 Allston, Washington
Boyhood, 10, 252 Andersen, Hans Christian The Ugly Duckling, 1, 294 The Tinder-Box, 1, 307 The Constant Tin Soldier, 1,
317
The Ant and the Grasshopper,
1,506
The Milkmaid and Her Pail,
1, 507
The Woodman and the Serpent,
1,507
The Fir Tree, 1, 323 The Flying Trunk, 1, 334 The Darning Needle, 1, 342 Pen and Inkstand, 1, 347
Anonymous
The Brave Little Tailor, 1,894
497
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Anonymous Jack and the Beanstalk, 1,
444
The Goose-Girl, 1, 470 He Who Knew Not Fear, 1,
478
When Brer Wolf have His Corn
Shucking, 2, 487
Brer Rabbit's Cool Air Swing, 2,
490
Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,
5, 15
The Story of Aladdin; or the Wonderful Lamp, 5, 46 Sindbad the Sailor, 5, 108 The Story of Joan of Arc, the Maid Who Saved France, 7,
113
How Joan the Maid Took
Largess from the English, 7,
130
Death of Joan the Maid, 7,
142
A Brave Scottish Chief, 7,
205
The Prisoner Who Would Not
Stay in Prison, 7, 278 The Remarkable Voyage of the Bounty, 7, 366 The Two Boy Hostages at the Siege of Seringapatam,
380
7,
The Story of Grace Darling, 7,
468
Anonymous Higgley Piggley, 10, 23 Great A, Little a, 10, 23 When I was a Bachelor, 10,
23
The North Wind Doth Blow,
10,24
Jack Sprat, 10, 24 Humpty Dumpty, 10, 24 Curly Locks, 10, 24 Come Let's to Bed, 10, 24
Solomon Grundy, 10, 25
Pease Pudding Hot, 10, 25
Ding, Dong, Bell, 10, 25 There Was an Old Woman Toss'd Up in a Basket, 10,
26
Little Miss Muffet, 10, 26 Little Jack Horner, 10, 26 Hey! Diddle, Diddle, 10, 26 This is the Way the Ladies Ride,
10,27
Little Bo-Peep, 10, 27 ToMarket, toMarket, to Buy a Fat Pig, 10, 28 OldKing Cole, 10, 28 LittlePolly Flinders, 10, 28 Jack and Jill, 10, 28 There Was an Old Woman Who
Lived in a Shoe, 10, 29 The Queen of Hearts, 10, 29 Diddle, Diddle, Dumpling, My Son John, 10, 29 Blow, Wind, Blow! 10, 29 Ride a Cock-Horse, 10, 30 Goosey, Goosey, Gander, 10,
30
Where Are You Going, My Pretty Maid? 10, 30
Baby Dear, Good Night, Good
Night, 10, 31 Taffy Was a Welshman, 10, 31 Kind Hearts Are Gardens, 10,
31
Lions and Tigers, 8, 447 Apes andMonkeys, 8, 453 The Hippopotamus and the Rhi- noceros, 8, 456
TheGiraffe 8, 458
Parrots, 8, 461
Nursery Rhymes, 10, 21
Sing a Song of Sixpence, 10,
21
A Diller, a Dollar, 10, 21 Simple Simon, 10, 22
Little Nancy Etticote, 10, 22 Little Boy Blue, 10, 22
Daffy-Down-Dilly, 10, 22
Pussy-Cat, Pussy-Cat, 10, 23
IHad a Little Pony, 10, 31 There is Very Little Trouble,
10, 32 Mistress Mary, Quite Contrary,
10, 32
498
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Anonymous
Hushaby, Baby, Thy Cradle is Green, 10, 32 Hearts, Like Doors, Will Open With Ease, 10, 32 The Old Woman Who Bought a
Little Pig, 10, 33
Weather Song, 10, 33 The Three Little Kittens, 10,
37
Mother Hubbard and Her Dog,
10, 89
Old Gaelic Lullaby, 10, 44
Sleep, Baby, Sleep! 10, 44 The New Moon, 10, 48
Try Again, 10, 71 Advice, 10, 82
Robin Goodfellow, 10, 84
The Lark and the Rook,
170 10,
The Ant and the Cricket, 10,
176
Summer Days, 10, 215
Arnold, Sir Edwin The Old Hare and the Elephants, 2, 434 Almond Blossom, 10, 219 Asbjörnsen, P. C. Ashiepattle and His Goodly Crew,
1, 125 The Squire's Bride, 1, 136 TheDoll in the Grass, 1, 140
TheBear and the Fox, 1, 142 Aulnoy, Mme. d'
Beauty and the Beast, 1, 426 Aytoun, William E. The Heart of the Bruce, 10,
351
Bacon, Josephine Dodge Daskam
The Imp and the Drum, 9, 99 The Sleepy Song, 10, 41 Baker, Ray Stannard The Taxes of Middlebrook, 9, 30
Baker, Sir Samuel W. A Brave Dog, 8, 84
A Parrot That Had Been
Trained to Fire a Cannon,
8. 177
Barnard, Charles
Rebecca the Drummer, 7, 426 Barnard, Edith
Ladybird, 9, 241 Barnes, Robert On a Slide-Board, 9, 199
Barnett, Evelyn Snead TheTravellingDoll, 9, 187 Bartlett, Frederick Orin
The Cost of Loving, 9, 225 Beattie , James Morning, 10, 136 Beddoes, Thomas Lowell
Sailor's Song, 10, 248 Beeching, H. С.
A Boy's Prayer, 10, 211 Bennett, Henry Holcomb
The Flag Goes By, 10, 301 Blake, William The Tiger, 10, 240 Bostwick, Helen B. Little Dandelion, 10, 245 Bouvé, Pauline Carrington
The Idea That Went Astray,
9, 168
Brooks, E. S. The Boy Viking-Olaf I of
Norway, 7, 67 TheBoy Conqueror-Charles XII ofSweden, 7, 244 Brooks, Phillips
O Little Town of Bethlehem, 10,
92
Brown, John, M.D. Rab and His Friends, 8, 465 Browne, Frances The Story of Fairyfoot, 6,
391
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett
The Romance of the Swan's Nest,
10, 205
Browning, Robert The Pied Piper of Hamelin, 10,
147
Song, 10, 242 How They Brought the Good News from Ghent to Aix, 10,
331
Hervé Riel, 10, 360
499
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Browning, Robert
Incident of the French Camp,
10, 367
Bryant, William Cullen Thanatopsis, 10, 132 To a Waterfowl, 10, 165 Robert of Lincoln, 10, 172
To the Fringed Gentian, 10, 214 Buckley, Elsie Finnimore
The Riddle of the Sphinx, 2,
222
Bunyan, John Christian's Fight with the Monster Apollyon, 5, 376 Christian and Hopeful Are Captives in Doubting Castle,
5, 382
Christian and Hopeful Arrive at the Cœlestial City, 5, 392 Burns, Robert
For A' That, 10, 266
Butts, Mary F.
Keeping Store, 10, 179 Buxton, E. M. WilmotThe Northmen's Story of How All Things Began, 2, 9
How the Queen of the Sky Gave Gifts to Men, 2, 17
How Thor's Hammer Was
Lost and Found, 2, 40 How the Fenris Wolf Was
Chained, 2, 72 The Story of Balder the Beau- tiful, 2, 80
Byron, Lord
Swimming, 10, 228 The Eve of Waterloo, 10, 313 The Destruction of Senna
cherib . 10, 366
Calkins, Franklin W.
Solomon's Grouch: the Story of a Bear, 8, 44 Campbell, Thomas Ye Mariners of England, 10,251 Carlyle, Thomas
To-day, 10, 87 Carroll, Lewis
Alice in Wonderland, 6, 407
Down the Rabbit-Hole, 6, 409 The Pool of Tears, 6, 416
A Caucus- Race and a Long Tale, 6, 424
The Rabbit Sends in a Little
Bill, 6, 432 Advice from a Caterpillar, 6,
441
Hunting the Calydonian Boar,
3, 128
The Winning of Atalanta, 3,
148
Bulfinch, Thomas
Niobe, a Victim of Latona's
Jealousy, 2, 278 The Sad Story of and Thisbe, 2, 282 Pyramus
The Twelve Labors of Hercules, 2, 286 The Story of Cupid and Psyche, 2, 318 How Phaëton Drove the Sun,
2, 330
Baucis and Philemon, Who were Changed into Two
Trees, 2, 339
The Trojan War, 3, 237 Ogier the Dane, 4, 231 ARoland for an Oliver, 4, 240 Rinaldo and Bayard, 4, 271 Bulfinch, Thomas, and
Church, Alfred J.
The Remnant of the Defeated
Army Seeks a New Home, 3,
397
Bunner, H. С.
A Pitcher of Mignonette, 10,
189
The Old Flag, 10, 304 Bunyan, John
Pilgrim's Progress, 5, 359 Christian Starts on His Journey, 5, 361 The Interpreter, Shows Chris- tian Many Excellent Things,
5, 367
Pig and Pepper, 6, 449 A Mad Tea-Party, 6, 459 The Queen's Croquet Ground,
6,469
500
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Carroll, Lewis The Mock Turtle's Story, 6,
479
The Lobster-Quadrille, 6, 488
Who Stole the Tarts ? 6, 497
Alice's Evidence, 6, 505
The Walrus and the Carpenter,
10, 107
A Lobster Quadrille, 10, 114 Cary, Phœbe
Suppose, 10, 86 Cervantes, Miguel de
Don Quixote, 4, 383
Chamberlain, Lucia
Scrap, 8, 101 Chamberlin, J. E.
A Christmas Adventure, 9,
55
Chaucer, Geoffrey
Canterbury Tales, 4, 199 Cheney, John Vance The Happiest Heart, 10, 264
Child, L. Maria
Who Stole the Bird's Nest?
10, 67 Thanksgiving Day, 10, 204
Child, Richard Washburn
In the Oven, 9, 186
Chorley, H. F.
The Brave Old Oak, 10, 231
Church, Alfred J.
The Quarrel of the Chiefs, 3,
240
The Fight Between Paris and Menelaus, 3, 251 The Duel Between Hector and
Ajax, 3, 257 The Deeds and Death of Patroclus, 3, 265 The Death of Hector, 3, 272
The Ransoming of Hector, 3,
283
Nausicaa Rescues Ulysses, 3,
357
Church, Alfred J.
The Trial of the Bow, 3, 384 The Vengeance of Ulysses, 3,
389
Venus Sends Æneas to Queen Dido, 3, 412 Queen Dido Welcomes Æneas,
3, 418
The Love and Death of Queen
Dido, 3, 425 The Sibyl Speaks to Æneas, 3,
450
The Dwellings of the Dead, 3,
455
The Story of Romulus and of
Numa, 3, 489
The Story of Alba, 3, 500
Church, Alfred J., and Bul- finch, Thomas The Remnant of the Defeated
Army Seeks a New Home, 3,
397
Clay, Beatrice-Retold by
Of Arthur's Birth and How He
Became King, 4, 13 The Round Table, 4, 18
Merlin the Magician, 4, 20 Sir Launcelot and the Adventure of the Castle Perilous,
4,30
Sir Launcelot and the Falcon,
4, 34
The Adventures of Sir Gareth,
4, 36
The Coming of Sir Galahad, 4,
45
How Sir Galahad Won the
Red Cross Shield, 4, 49
The Adventures of Sir Percivale, 4, 52
The Adventures of Sir Bors, 4,
56
Ulysses and the Swineherd, 3,
368
The Return of Telemachus, 3,
373
Ulysses in His Home, 3, 377
The Adventures of Sir Launcelot, 4, 60
How Sir Launcelot Saw the
Holy Grail, 4, 63 The End of the Quest, 4, 65 The Fair Maid of Astolat,
68
501
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor
The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, 10, 423 Connolly, James B.
The Second String, 9, 116
Cooke, Rose Terry ACase of Coincidence, 6, 83
Coolidge, Susan
How the Leaves Came Down,
10, 70
Cooper, George
Twenty Froggies, 10, 42 Come, Little Leaves, 10, 187 Cornell, Mrs.
Anna and the Rattler, 8, 247 Cornwall, Barry
The Sea, 10, 257
Cowper, William John Gilpin, 10, 117 The Nightingale and Glow- worm, 10, 169
Knowledge, 10, 280 Cox, Sir George W. The Gift of Athene, 2, 250 Daphne, Child of the Morning,
2,253 The Vengeance of Apollo, 2,
255
The Story of Arion, 2, 261 (The Battle of the Frogs and the Mice, 2, 267 Orpheus the Sweet Singer, 2,
973
The Lotus-Eaters, 3, 301 Ulysses and the Cyclops, 3,
305
Ulysses and the Sirens, 3, 353 The Treason of Ganelon, 4, 243 The Great Battle of Roncesvalles, 4, 253 Charlemagne Revenges Roland,
4, 264
How Thierry Vanquished Gan- elon, 4, 267 Craik, Mrs. Dinah Mulock
Brownie and the Cook, 6, 139 Brownie and the Cherry Tree,
6, 149
See also MULOCK, DINAH MARIA
Craik, Georgiana M.
Uncle Dick's Rolf, 8, 94 Cunningham, Allan
A Sea Song, 10, 241 Cutting, Theodore A.
Saved by a Seal, 8, 197 Darton, F. J. H.-Retold by The Adventures of King Horn,
4, 135
Horn is Dubbed Knight, 4, 138 Horn the Knight Errant, 4
142
Horn in Exile, 4, 145
Horn's Return, 4, 148 The King of Suddenne, 4, 153 Havelok Hid From the Traitor,
4, 157 Havelok Married Against His Will, 4, 163 Havelok Wins Back His Kingdom, 4, 167
The Fair Unknown, 4, 175 The Fight with the Two Giants, 4, 182 In the Castle of the Sorcerers,
4, 189 The Old Woman and the
Knight, 4, 201 Death and the Three Revellers,
4, 207 Patient Griselda, 4, 212 Dasent, Sir George Webbe The Lad Who Went to the North Wind, 1, 147 The Husband Who Was to Mind the House, 1, 151 How One Went Out to Woo, 1,
154
Why the Bear is Stumpy- Tailed, 1, 155 Boots Who Made the Princess
Say "That's a Story," 1, 156 Davis, M. Ε. Μ.
The Messenger, 7, 434 Davis, Rebecca Harding
A Fox and a Raven, 6, 46 Day, Sarah J. Hollyhock, 10, 146 Crocus, 10, 164
502
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Dayrell, Elphinstone, F. R. G. S., F. R. A. I. Why the Hippopotamus Lives in the Water, 2, 455 Why the Elephant has Small Eyes, 2, 457 Defoe, Daniel
Robinson Crusoe is Shipwrecked, 5, 159 Alone on a Desolate Island, 5,
171
The Building of the Boat, 5,
184
Finds the Print of a Man's
Foot on the Sand, 5, 194
Friday Rescued from the Can- nibals, 5, 211 Robinson Crusoe Rescued, 5,
222
Dibdin, Charles
Heaving of the Lead, 10,
135
Dickens, Charles
The Cratchits' Christmas Dinner, 6, 267 Dickinson, Emily
Voyagers, 10, 260
Dobell, Sydney
Procession of the Flowers, 10,
239
Dodge, Mary Mapes
The Race for the Silver Skates,
6,7
Downs, A. S. Plato: the Story of a Cat, 8,
111
Doyle, Arthur Conan
The Bowman's Song, 10, 334 Dryden, John
Daisies, 10, 253 Dunbar, Paul Laurence
The Colored Band, 10, 344
Duncan, Norman
Emerson, Ralph Waldo
The Rhodora, On Being Asked,
Whence is the Flower, 10,
341
Emmett, Daniel Decatur
Dixie, 10, 288
Ewald, Carl
The Cure of Fear, 9, 43 Eliot, Charles W.
Introduction, 1 , 3
Emerson, Ralph Waldo
Concord Hymn, 10, 314 A Nation's Strength, 10, 316
TheDragon-Fly and the Water- Lily, 8, 261
The Queen Bee, 8, 279
The Beech and the Oak, 8,
312
The Mist, 8, 336
The Anemones, 8, 343 The Weeds, 8, 351
Ewing, Juliana Horatia
Snap - Dragons -A Tale of
Christmas Eve, 6, 213
Field, Eugene
Lady Button-Eyes, 10, 45 The Rock-a-by Lady, 10, 47 The Sugar- Plum Tree, 10, 52 Wynken, Blynken, and Nod,
10, 55 The Shut-Eye Train, 10, 58 The Duel, 10, 127
The Dinkey-Bird, 10, 145 Field, Mrs. E. M.
Uncle Jack's Story, 6, 941
Bryda's Dreadful Scrape, 6,
259
Field, Michael
The Dancers, 10, 98 Fielde, Adele M.
A Dreadful Boar, 1, 244 The Five Queer Brothers, 1,
247
Fitchett, Rev. W. H., LL.D.
A Famous Fight Between an English and a French Frigate,
7,344
The Man Who Spoiled Napo- leon's "Destiny," 7, 385
Fitzgerald, Edward
The Meadows in Spring, 10,
233
Perseverance, 10, 283 Fosdick, Capt. O. G. A Runaway Whale, 8, 196
503
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Francis, H. N.-Translated by
The Hare Who Thought the World had Come to an End,
2, 430
Freeman, Mary E. Wilkins Deacon Thomas Wales' Will,
6, 116
Dill, 6, 128
French, Allen My Fight with a Catamount,
8, 26
Frentz, E. W.
"Old Mustard" : A Tale of the
Western Pioneers, 8, 73
Frere, E.
Punchkin, 1, 48 How Sun, Moon and Wind Went Out to Dinner, 1, 65 Gask, Lillian M.
The Golden Fish, 1, 209 The Legend of Saint Chris- topher, 2, 187 Prince Ivan and the Gray Wolf, 2, 195
The Four Seasons, 2, 493
The Three Lemons, 2, 500 The Two Gifts, 6, 354 The Bar of Gold, 6, 357
The Horse that Aroused the
Town, 8, 57
At Home with the Beavers, 8,
381
Two Enemies of the Beavers,
8,393
The Squirrel's Story, 8, 406 A Den in the Rocks, 8, 418 Ships of the Desert, 8, 429 Gatty, Mrs. Alfred The Butterfly's Children, 8,
254
The Oak and the Snail, 8,
321
Some Voices from the Kitchen
Garden, 8, 359 The Wind and the Flowers, 8,
369
Gilder, R. W. On the Life-Mask of Abraham Lincoln, 10, 320
Gilman, Arthur The Lost Exiles of Texas,
234
Goddard, Julia The Wonderful Quern Stones,
2, 91
Goldsmith, Oliver
The Deserted Village, 10, 405 Gould, Hannah Flagg
The Frost, 10, 218 Gray, Thomas
Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard, 10, 159 Gregory, Lady The Three Sons, 1, 232
Grey, Sir George
The Legend of Rata, 2, 450 Grimm, William and Jacob
Hansel and Grethel, 1, 262
Thumbling, 1, 272 The Six Swans, 1, 279 Snow-White and Rose-Red, 1,
285
Gudrun Lay, From the The Wooing of the Daughter of the King of Ireland, 2,
171
Guest, Lady Charlotte Kynon's Adventure at the Fountain, 4, 19
Owain's Adventure at the
Fountain, 4, 85
Gawain's Adventure in Search
of Owain, 4, 95
The Adventure of the Lion,
99
How Pwyll Outwitted Gawl,
4, 104 How Manawyddan Caught a
Thief, 4, 112 The Story of Lludd and Lleve- lys, 4, 125 Hale, Edward Everett
The Man Without a Country,
9, 279
Hale, Lucretia P.
The Flight of the Dolls, 6, 94 Solomon John Goes for Apples,
6, 102
504
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Harraden, Beatrice
How Phidias Helped the Image- Maker, 7, 11
How Livia Won the Brooch, 7,
35
Harris, Joel Chandler
Brother Rabbitt's Cradle, 9, 7
Harrison, Elizabeth
A Story of Christopher Colum- bus for Little Children, 7,
166
OldJohnnyAppleseed, 7, 480 A Story of Decoration Day for the Little Children of Today, 9, 23 Harte, Bret
The Drum, 10, 336
Hartt, C. F.
How the Tortoise Out-ran the
Deer, 2, 441 Which was the Stronger, the Tortoise, the Tapir, or the Whale? 2, 444 Haveli, H. L.
The Adventure with the Harpies, 3, 403 Pursued by the Cyclops, 3, 406 The Race of the Four Galleys,
3, 437
The Foot Race, 3, 443 The Boxing Match, 3, 445
The Contest of the Archers, 3,
448
The Oracle Foretells the Coming of Æneas, 3, 467 Æneas and His Companions Eat Their Tables, 3, 469 The Fight Between Æneas and
Turnus, 3, 473 The Death of Turnus, 3, 480 Hawkins, Gen. Rush C.
Carlo, the Soldiers' Dog, 8, 77
Jeff the Inquisitive, 8, 138
Toby the Wise, 8, 164 Hawthorne, Nathaniel
Hercules's Search for the Ap- ples of Hesperides, 2, 292 The Paradise of Children, 2,
342
Hawthorne, Nathaniel
How Theseus Slays the Min otaur, 3, 15 Pegasus, the Winged Horse,3,
51
Turning Everything into Gold,
3, 172
The Pomegranate Seeds, 3, 198 Circe's Palace, 3, 315
The Great Stone Face, 6,
293
The Sunken Treasure, 7, 228 Hayne, Paul H. A Storm in the Distance, 10,
221
Hemans, Felicia Dorothea
The Landing of the Pilgrim Fathers in New England, 10,
311
Casabianca, 10, 338 Hendrick, Roe L. In Canada with a Lynx, 8,
37
Herrick, Robert
Succession of the Four Sweet Months, 10, 254 Hinkson, Katherine Tynan
Daffodil, 10, 212 Hogg, James ABoy's Song, 10, 191 Holder, C. F.
Teaching Fish to Ring Bells,
8, 222
Holm, Saxe
A Song of Clover, 10, 220 Holmes, Oliver Wendell The Chambered Nautilus, 10,
249
Old Ironsides, 10, 335
Homer
Tales of the Trojan War, 3,
235
The Homeward Voyage of the Greek Hero Ulysses, 3299 Hood, Charles Newton
Down the Incline, 9, 220 Hopkins, J. H. Three Kings of Orient, 10,
105
505
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Hopper, Nora Wind-Song, 10, 182 March, 10, 253
Hornaday, W. T.
Little Cyclone; the Story of a
Hough, Emerson Grizzly Cub, 8, 9
Kit Carson's Duel, 7, 454
Howe, Julia Ward Battle-Hymn of the Republic,
10,300 Howitt, Mary The Spider and the Fly, 10, 49 The Voice of Spring, 10, 209 Howitt, William
James, Lieut.-Col. W. Hill
The Faithful Little Lizard, 8,
161
Jenks, Tudor
The Little Baxters Go Marketing, 9, 18
Small and Early, 10, 81 Jenner, Dr. Edward Signs of Rain, 10, 190 Johnson, Burges Waiting Around, 10, 157 Jonson, Ben The Noble Nature, 10, 265 Jordan, David Starr The Story of a Stone, 8, 325 The Wind in a Frolic, 10, Karajich, W. S.
345
Hunt, Leigh The Grasshopper and Cricket,
10, 175 Ingelow, Jean TheOuphe Ou of theWood, 6,156
The Prince's Dream, 6, 171 ALost Wand, 6, 183
Seven Times One, 10, 188 Seven Times Two, 10, 199
Seven Times Four, 10, 222
Buttercup, 10, 279 Ingersoll, Ernest
Hard to Hit, 8, 148
Irving, Washington Rip Van Winkle, 2, 364 The Legend of Sleepy Hollow,
2, 386
Isaacs, Dr. A. S.-Translated from the Talmudby
The Rabbi Who Found the
Diadem, 7, 34
Jacobs, Joseph Why the Fish Laughed, 1, 67 The Farmer and the Money Lender, 1, 75
Pride Goeth Before a Fall, 1,
78
How the Wicked Sons Were
Duped, 1, 81
Jack the Giant-Killer, 1, 374
Tom Thumb, 1, 381 Hop-O' -My-Thumb, 1, 458
The Wonderful Hair, 1, 213
The Language of Animals, 1,
216
The Emperor Trojan's Goat's Ears,1,223
TheMaid Who Was Wiser Than
the King, 1, 226 Keary, A. and E. The Dwarfs and the Fairies,
2, 21 How Thor Went to Jötunheim,
2,26 Iduna's Apples of Youth, 2,
51
Keats, John The Grasshopper and Cricket,
10, 178
Daisy's Song, 10, 217 Ker, Annie The Two Lizards, 1, 256 How the Turtle Got His Shell,
2,446 Key, Francis Scott
The Star-Spangled Banner, 10,
286
Kingsley, Charles
The Heroes Sail Away in
Search of the Golden Fleece,
3,80
How Jason Lost His Sandal,
3,88
How They Built the Ship Argo,
3,98
506
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Kingsley, Charles How the Argonauts Sailed to Colchis, 3, 102 A Sea-Fight in the Time of Queen Bess, 7, 179 The Lost Doll, 10, 89 A Farewell, 10, 282 Kingston, W. H. G. Some True Stories of Tigers,
Wolves, Foxes and Bears, 8,
11
Some True Stories of Horses
and Donkeys, 8, 65 Kletke, Hermann R. The Three Brothers, 1, 186 The Glass Mountain and the
Golden Castle, 1, 190 Lamb, Charles
The Houeskeeper, 10, 177 Landseer, Ruth Blackamoor, 8, 169 Lang, Andrew-Retold by The Boy and the Wolves, 1,42 The Indian Who Lost His
Wife, 1, 45 The Witch in the Stone Boat,
1, 158 The Half-Chick,
Pollito, 1, 180
or Medio
Hok Lee and the Dwarfs, 1,238 Larcom, Lucy
The Brown Thrush, 10, 166 Lear, Edward The Owl and the Pussy-Cat,
10, 101 The Table and the Chair, 10,
111
The Jumblies, 10, 138 Lee, Albert Cressy's New Year's Rent, 9,
359
Le Gallienne, Richard
A Child's Even Song, 10, 43 Lever, Charles Mr. O'Leary's Second Love, 9,
370
Lincoln, Abraham
The Gettysburg Address, 10,
284
Lisle, Rouget de The Marseillaise, 10, 299
Livy Stories from Roman History,
3, 487
London, Jack Chased by the Trail, 9, 66 Longfellow, Henry W. King Robert of Sicily, 2, 213 Evangeline of Acadia, 7, 306 Maidenhood, 10, 61 The Children's Hour, 10, 72 Hiawatha's Childhood,
196
Daybreak, 10, 232
10,
Hiawatha's Sailing, 10, 235 The Day is Done, 10, 246 The Arrow and the Song, 10,
256
The Village Blacksmith, 10,
262
Retribution, 10, 283 The Republic, 10, 310 Paul Revere's Ride, 10, 323 The Skeleton in Armor, 10, 399 The Wreck of the Hesperus,
10, 420 Lowell, James Russell
Life, 10, 264 Lubbock, Sir John The Intelligence of Ants, 8,
298
Lucas, E. V. The Doll Doctor, 9, 152 Lummis, Charles F. The Impudent Guinea-Pig, 8,
144
Macaulay, Thomas Babington
Naseby, 10, 327 Ivry, 10, 347 Horatius at the Bridge, 10,369
MacCarthy, Denis
Labor Song, 10, 261 McCulloch, Emma Powell O Canada! 10, 318
MacDonald, George The Wind and the Moon, 10,
184
507
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Mackay, Charles The Giant, 10, 64 Small Beginnings 10, 258 Macleod, Mary-Retold by Robin Hood and the Knight,
4, 331
Little John and the Sheriff of
Nottingham, 4, 344 How Robin Hood was Paid His
Loan, 4, 351 The Golden Arrow, 4, 353
How the Sheriff Took Sir
Richard Prisoner, 4, 358 How the King Came to Sherwood Forest, 4, 361 How Robin Hood Went Back
to the Greenwood, 4, 367 Robin Hood and the Butcher,
4, 370
The Jolly Tanner, 4, 374 How Robin Hood Drew His
Bow for the Last Time. 4,
378
Malory, Sir Thomas
The Sword Excalibur, 4, 22 Marbot, Lieutenant-General
Baron de
How Napoleon Rewarded His Men, 7, 403 Mathews, Cornelius
The Bird Lover, 2, 465 Wunzh, the Father of Indian Corn, 2, 479 The Winter-Spirit Visitor, 2, 512 Mathews, John L.
and His
Big Timber Beacon, 9, 79 Maud, Constance Brunhilda and the Magic Sword, 2, 99
Brunhilda's Sleep Guarded by Loki's Fiery Arm, 2, 107 How Siegfried Killed the
Dragon, 2, 115 How Siegfried Finds Brun- hilda, 2, 133
The Plot Against the Beauti- ful Elsa of Brabant, 2,
141
Maud, Constance
The Knights of the HolyGrail,
2, 148
Lohengrin the Champion of Elsa of Brabant, 2, 150
Ortruda Plots for Revenge, 2,
158
The Departure of Lohengrin,
2, 162
May, Sophie
Wild Robin, 6, 106
Miller, Emily Huntington
The Bluebird, 10, 168
Miller, William
Willie Winkie, 10, 63
Milne-Horne, Mary Pamela
De King and de Peafowl, 1,
259
Milton, John
To the Lord General Cromwell,
10, 280
On His Blindness, 10, 281
Mitford, Α. Β.
The Accomplished and Lucky Teakettle, 1, 251
The Adventures of Little
Peachling, 1, 253 Moore, Clement C.
A Visit From St. Nicholas,
10, 103
Morley, Charles
Peter: A Cat o' One Tail, 8,
114
Morris, George Pope
Woodman, Spare That Treel
10, 216 Motherwell, William
They Come : The Merry Sum- mer Months, 10, 242 Mulock, Miss-Retold by
Cinderella, 1, 350
The Fair One With Golden
Locks, 1, 412 Mulock, Dinah Maria
God Rest Ye, Merry Gentle- men, 10, 113
Young Dandelion, 10, 115 Green Things Growing, 10,
210
508
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Munchausen, Baron
See RASPE, R. E. Munsell, Lelia How Hilda Got a School, 9, 90
Murray, W. H. H. A Ride With a Mad Horse in
a Freight Car, 8, 484 Naaké, John T. Huntsman the Unlucky, 1, 196 Story of Little Simpleton, 1,
202
National Hymns
America, 10, 285 The Star-Spangled Banner, 10,
286
Dixie, 10, 288 Rule Britannia! 10, 289 The Watch on the Rhine, 10,
290
The Marseillaise Hymn, 10,
292
Swedish National Air, 10, 293 National Hymn of Norway,
10, 293 Italian National Hymn, 10,
294
Danish National Hymn, 10, 295 Spanish National Hymn, 10,
296
Austrian National Song, 10,
297
Neilson, William Allan
Reading Guide, 10, 453 Nesbit, E.-Retold by A Midsummer-Night's Dream,
5, 331
The Tempest, 5, 338 As You Like It, 5, 345 The Merchant of Venice, 5, 351 Norton, Caroline E.
The Arab to His Favorite
Steed, 10, 393
Parry, Judge-Retold by
An Introduction to that Spanish Gentleman, 4, 385 He Sets Forth on His Adventures, 4, 390 The Knighting of Don Quixote,
4, 395 The Dreadful Adventure of the
Windmills, 4, 402 Don Quixote and the Goatherds, 4, 411 How Don Quixote Arrived at
an Inn Which He Imagined to be a Castle, 4, 420 How Sancho Paid the Reckoning at the Inn, 4, 429 The Adventure of the Two
Armies, 4, 435 Don Quixote Does Penance as Did the Knights of Old, 4,
442
Sancho's Journey to the Lady Dulcinea, 4, 449 The Story of Cardenio, 4, 455 The Story of Dorothea,
463
The End of the Penance,
470
The Journey to the Inn,
476
Sancho Panza's Story of His Visit to the Lady Dulcinea,
4, 485 Don Quixote Wages a Battle Against a Giant, 4, 490 Adventures at the Inn, 4, 497 The Princess Micomicona, 4,
503
The Last of the Notable Adventures of Our Good Knight,
4, 509
Patten, Grace Bigelow The Wooden Horse, 3, 295 Patten, William Paine, Ralph D. Jabez Rockwell's PowderHorn, 7, 317 Preface, 1, 15
Palmer, Frederick Preface, 3,9
The Call of the Sea, 9, 201 Preface, 4, 9
Pangborn, Georgia Wood Preface, 5, 9
The Gray Collie, 9, 328 Preface, 7, 9
509
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Payne, John Howard Home, Sweet Home, 10, 250 Pennington, Levi T.
Old Muskie the Rogue, 8, 209 Percival, James Gates
The Coral Grove, 10, 137
Perrault, Charles
Little Red Riding-Hood, 1,
359
Puss in Boots, 1, 367 Blue Beard, 1, 388
Raju, Ramaswami
The Camel and the Pig, 1, 119 The Dog and the Dog Dealer,
1, 120
The Tiger, the Fox, and the Hunters, 1, 121 The Sea, the Fox, and the Wolf, 1, 122
The Fox in the Well, 1, 123 Rankin, Isaac Ogden Gravity Gregg, 9, 171 The Sleeping Beauty in the Raspe, R. E. Wood, 1, 405
Pettee, G. W.
Sleigh Song, 10, 186 Phelps, Elizabeth Stuart How June Found Massa Linkum, 7, 495 Pier, Arthur Stanwood The Drasnoe Pipe-Line, 9, 255 Pierpont, John
Warren's Address to the American Soldiers, 10, 303
Poe, Edgar Allan
The Bells, 10, 447
Potter, Beatrix
The Tale of Peter Rabbit, 8,
443
Pratt, Anna Maria
A Mortifying Mistake, 10, 60 Quiller-Couch, Arthur The Adventure of Grizel Cochrane, 7, 214
The Trick of an Indian Spy,
7,348
A Fire- Fighter's Rescue from
the Flames, 7, 396 A Rescue from Shipwreck, 7,
418
A Fire-Fighter's Dog, 8, 109 Raju, Ramaswami
The Thief and the Fox, 1, 114 The Farmer and the Fox, 1,
115
The Fools and the Drum, 1,
116
The Lion and the Goat, 1, 117 The Glowworm and the Jackdaw, 1, 118
The Startling Adventures of Baron Munchausen, 5, 503 An Adventure With a Lion and
a Crocodile, 5, 505 Crossing the Thames Without the Aid of Bridge, Boat or Balloon, 5, 508 Two Strange Adventures in Russia, 5, 509
Shooting a Stag With Cherry- Stones, 5, 511 The Baron's Wonderful Dog,
5, 513
Read, Thomas Buchanan
Sheridan's Ride, 10, 308
Riley, James Whitcomb
Little Orphant Annie, 10, 128 The Man in the Moon, 10, 141 The Raggedy Man, 10, 143 Rossetti, Christina G.
Who Has Seen the Wind? 10,
182
Rouse, Rev. W. H. D.-Translated by The Watering of the Saplings,
2, 433
Ruskin, John
The King of the Golden River,
6, 321
Saintine, Xavier B. The Lady of Kynast, 2, 180 TheGuardian Angel, 2, 183 The Giant Who Laughed at a
Dwarf, 2, 185 Schneckenburger, Maz
The Watch on the Rhine, 10,
290
510
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Schoolcraft, H. R.-Adapted
from
Manabozho,
Maker, 1, 19
the MischiefWhy the Woodpecker Has Red Head Feathers, 1, 26
Why the Diver Duck Has So Few Tail Feathers, 1, 31 Manabozho is Changed Into a
Wolf, 1, 33 Manbozho is Robbed by the Wolves, 1, 36 Manabozho and the Woodpeckers, 1, 38 The Boy Who Set a Snare for the Sun, 2, 460
Scott, Sir Walter Ivanhoe, 5, 399 Guy Mannering, 5, 458 Lullaby of an Infant Chief,
10, 54
Fatherland, 10, 302 Lochinvar, 10, 397 Sébillot, Paul
The Snuffbox, 1, 166
The Golden Blackbird, 1, 172 Sewell, Anna
What Ginger Told Black Beauty, 8, 60 Shakespeare, William A Midsummer-Night's Dream,
5, 331
The Tempest, 5, 338 As You Like It, 5, 345 The Merchant of Venice, 5, 351 Hark, Hark! The Lark! 10, 256 Cardinal Wolsey's Speech to Cromwell, 10, 268 Wolsey's Fall, 10, 269 Seven Ages of Man, 10, 270 Jog On, 10, 271 Polonius's Advice, 10, 271 Over Hill, Over Dale, 10, 272 Reputation, 10, 272 I Know a Bank, 10, 273 Ingratitude, 10, 273 Where the Bee Sucks, 10, 274
Mercy, 10, 274 Perfection, 10, 275
Shakespeare, William
The Pedler's Pack, 10, 275 The Fairies' Lullaby, 10, 276 Come Unto These Yello0
Sands, 10, 277 Hotspur's Description of a
Fop, 10, 278 Opportunity, 10, 278 Sharp, Dallas Lore
Jonnasen, 9, 179 Shelley, Percy Bysshe
To a Skylark, 10, 223 Sill, Edward Rowland
Opportunity, 10, 260 Sinclair, Catherine
Uncle David's Nonsensical
Story, 6, 362 The Grand Feast, 6, 374 Skeat, Walter, M. R. A. S. The Elephant Has a Bet With the Tiger, 2, 436 Smith, S. F.
America, 10, 285 Southey, Mrs.
The Story of the Three Bears,
1, 362
To the Lady-Bird, 10, 174 Southey, Robert
How the Child of the Sea Was
Made Knight, 4, 279 Why Don Sancho Attacked His Neighbors, 4, 289 Don Garcia Defies Don Sancho, 4, 292 Don Garcia Takes Don Sancho Prisoner, 4, 296 The Siege of Zamora, 4, 309 How Don Diego Fought the Three Brothers, 4, 321 After Blenheim, 10, 383 Southey, Robert and Caroline
The Greenwood Shrift, 10, 389 Southwell, Robert
Procrastination, 10, 267 Spears, Raymond S.
TheStory of aForestFire,7,509 Stedman, Edmund Clarence
What the Wind Brings, 10, 180
511
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Stedman, Edmund Clarence The Hand of Lincoln, 10,
298
Cavalry Song, 10, 319 Steel, Flora Annie The Tiger, the Brahman, and the Jackal, 1, 82 The Lambikin, 1, 86 TheRat's Wedding, 1, 89 The Jackal and the Partridge,
1,98 The Jackal and the Crocodile,
1, 102 The Jackal and the Iguana, 1,
106
The Bear's Bad Bargain, 1,
109
Stephens, C. A.
Stoddard, William O.
That Sly Old Woodchuck, 8,
151
Stowe, Harriet Beecher
The Katy's-Did's Party, 8,
305
Sullivan, Sir Edward-Retoldby Ivanhoe, 5, 401 GuyMannering, 5, 458 Swett, Susan Hartley The Blue Jay, 10, 167 July, 10, 213 Swift, Jonathan Gulliver is Shipwrecked and Swims for His Life, 5,
249
Gulliver at the Court of LilliADroll Fox-Trap, 8, 51 put, 5, 262
Powder-Post, 8, 267 Stevenson Stevenson,, Robert Louis Gulliver Captures Fifty of the Enemy's Ships, 5, 272
Young Night- Thought, 10, 53 Gulliver Leaves Lilliput, 5,
My Shadow, 10, 88 278
The Swing, 10, 90 Time to Rise, 10, 90 Happy Thought, 10, 91
10,
93
The Lamplighter, 10, 91 Picture-Books in Winter,
The Land of Story-Books, 10,
94
The Land of Counterpane, 10,
96
Block City, 10, 97 Marching Song, 10, 98 Winter-Time, 10, 99
Foreign Lands, 10, 100
Foreign Children, 10, 102 Bed in Summer, 10, 106
My Bed is a Boat, 10, 106
AGood Play, 10, 112 The Flowers, 10, 126
The Wind, 10, 181 Windy Nights, 10, 183 Stockton, Frank R. A Man Who Coveted Washing- ton's Shoes, 7, 332
The Man in the "Auger Hole, "
7,356
Gulliver in the Land of the
Giants, 5, 286 Some of Gulliver's Adventures,
5, 301
Gulliver Escapes from the Eagle,
5, 312 The Vowels: An Enigma, 10,
79
Swinburne, Algernon C.
ABaby's Feet, 10, 76 Tanner, John A White Boy Among the In- dians, as Told by Himself, 7,
292
Taylor, Bayard
The Little Post-Boy, 7, 485
Some Animal Friends in Africa,
8,22
Taylor, Jane
Pussy, 10, 38
Taylor, Jeffreys
The Milkmaid, 10, 194 Tennyson, Alfred Sweet and Low, 10, 55
Christmas, 10, 95 The Owl, 10, 171
512
INDEX OF AUTHORS
Tennyson, Alfred Song, 10, 178 The Brook, 10, 228
The Bugle Song, 10, 230 The Charge of the Light Brigade,
10, 321
Lady Clare, 10, 385 Thackeray, William MakePrelude, 9, 391
Watts, Isaac
Insignificant 265
Existence, 10,
White, Stewart Edward The Foreman, 9, 315 Whitman, Walt
O Captain ! My Captain! 10,
315
Whitney, Mrs. A. D. T.
The Rose and the Ring, 9, Whittier, John Greenleaf
393
Thanet, Octave
peace
The Private Theatricals, 6, 56
The Barefoot Boy, 10, 201 Barbara Frietchie, 10, 305
Laus Deo! 10, 342 Wiggin, Kate Douglas The Fore-Room Rug, 9, 340 Cuddle Down, Dolly, 10, 57
Marcus Aurelius, 8, 224
Thaxter, Celia The Sandpiper's Trick, 8, 180 How Did the Canary Do It ?
8,183
Thomas, Rowland Manuk Del Monte, 9, 269 Thomson, James Rule Britannia, 10, 289 Tilton, Theodore
Baby Bye, 10, 78 Tolman, Albert W. A Swarm of Wild Bees, 8,
290
Holding the Pipe, 9, 128
On aTight Rope, 9, 213 Towle, George Č.
Humphry Davy and the Safety- Lamp, 7, 449 The Struggles of Charles Goodyear, 7, 475 Trowbridge, J. Т. Farm- Yard Song, 10, 192 Van Dyke, Henry
A Wayfaring Song, 10, 255
Virgil The Wanderings of Æneas, 3,
395
Williamson, Peter The True Story of a Kidnaped Boy as Told by Himself, 7,
265
Walden, Treadwell
The Boy-Heroes of Crecy and Poitiers, 7, 87
Warner, Anna B.
Ready for Duty, 10, 131 Warner, Charles Dudley
A-Hunting of the Deer, 8,
505
Wolfe, Charles The Burial of Sir John Moore,
10, 317
Woodworth, Samuel The Old Oaken Bucket, 10, 896
Wordsworth, William
The Kitten, and Falling Leaves,
10, 179
Daffodils, 10, 211 March, 10, 254 The Rainbow, 10, 281
To Milton, 10, 282 Wotton, Sir Henry The Character of a Happy Life,
10, 340
Yonge, Charlotte M. The Fight at the Pass of Thermopylæ, 7, 17 The Bravery of Regulus, 7, 27 Fearless Saint Genevieve, Patron Saint of Paris, 7, 60 The Noble Burghers of Calais,
7,99
How Catherine Douglas Tried
to Save King James of Scotland, 7, 149
The Brave Queen of Hungary,
7, 155
513

INDEX OF TITLES
Jun. Cl-10 17

INDEX OF TITLES
Titles of Poems are printed in italics. Volumes are indicated by bold-face figures
Accomplished and Lucky Tea- kettle, The, 1, 251
Adventure of Grizel Cochrane,
The, 7, 214
Adventure of the Lion, The,
4,99
Adventure of the Two Armies,
The, 4, 435
Adventure with a Lion and a
Crocodile, An, 5, 505 Adventure with the Harpies,
The, 3, 403 Adventures at the Inn, 4, 497 Adventures of King Horn, The,
4, 135
Adventures of Little Peachling,
The, 1, 253 Adventures of Sir Bors, The, 4,
56
Adventures of Sir Gareth, The,
4, 36
Adventures of Sir Launcelot,
The, 4, 60 Adventures of Sir Percivale, The,
4, 52
Advice, 10, 82 Advice from a Caterpillar, 6,
441
Æneas and His Companions Eat Their Tables, 3, 469
After Blenheim, 10, 383 Aladdin; or, the Wonderful
Lamp, 5, 46 A-Hunting of the Deer, 8, 505 Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,
5, 15 Alice in Wonderland, 6, 407
Alice's Evidence, 6, 505 Almond Blossom, 10, 219
Alone on a Desolate Island, 5,
171
America, 10, 285 Androcles, 1, 496
Anemones, The, 8, 343
Anna and the Rattler, 8, 247
Ant and the Cricket, The, 10, 176 Ant and the Grasshopper, The,
1,506
Apes and Monkeys, 8, 453 Arab to His Favorite Steed, The,
10, 393
Arabian Nights, The, 5, 13 Arrow and the Song, The, 10, 256 Ashiepattle and His Goodly Crew, 1, 125 Ass and the Lap-Dog, The, 1, 505 As You Like It, 5, 345 At Home with the Beavers, 8,
381
Austrian National Song, 10, 297
Baby Bye, 10, 73
Baby Dear, Good Night, Good Night, 10, 31
Baby's Feet, A, 10, 76
Bar of Gold, The, 6, 357 Barbara Frietchie, 10, 305
Barefoot Boy, The, 10, 201
Baron's Wonderful Dog, The,
5, 513
Bat, the Birds, and the Beasts,
The, 1, 512 Battle-Hymn of the Republic,
10, 300
Battle of the Frogs and the Mice, The, 2, 267 Baucis and Philemon, Who were Changed into Two Trees, 2,
339
517
INDEX OF TITLES
Bear and the Fox, The, 1, 142
Bear's Bad Bargain, The, 1, 109 Beauty and the Beast, 1, 426 Bed in Summer, 10, 106
Beech and the Oak, The, 8, 312 Belling the Cat, 1, 504 Bells, The, 10, 447
Crunhilda and the Magic Sword,
2,99
Brunhilda's Sleep Guarded by Loki's Fiery Arm, 2, 107 Bryda's Dreadful Scrape, 6, 259 Bugle Song, The, 10, 230 Building of the Boat, The, 5, 184 Belly and the Members, The, 1, Burial of Sir John Moore, The,
513
Big Timber Beacon, 9, 79 Bird Lover, The, 2, 465
Blackamoor, 8, 169
Block City, 10, 97 Blow, Wind, Blow! 10, 29
Blowing Bubbles, 10, 72 Blue Beard, 1, 388 Blue Jay, The, 10, 167 Bluebird, The, 10, 168
Boots Who Made the Princess
Say "That's a Story," 1, 156 Bowman's Song, The, 10, 334 Boxing Match, The, 3, 445 Boy and the Wolves, The, 1, 42 Boy Conqueror-Charles XII of Sweden, The, 7, 244 Boy-Heroes of Crecy and Poitiers,
The, 7, 87 Boy Viking-Olaf II of Norway,
The, 7, 67 Boy Who Set a Snare for the Sun, The, 2, 460 Boyhood, 10, 252 Boy's Prayer, A, 10, 211 Boy's Song, A, 10, 191 Brave Dog, A, 8, 84 Brave Little Tailor, The, 1, 394
Brave Old Oak, The, 10, 231 Brave Queen of Hungary, The,
7, 155
Brave Scottish Chief, A, 7, 205 Bravery of Regulus, The, 7, 27 Brer Rabbit's Cool Air Swing,
2,490 Brook, The, 10, 228 Brother Rabbit's Cradle, 9, 7
Brown Thrush, The, 10, 166 Brownie and the Cherry Tree,
6,140
Brownie and the Cook, 6, 139
10, 317
Buttercup, 10, 279 Butterfly's Children, The, 8, 254 Call of the Sea, The, 9, 201 Camel and the Pig, The, 1, 119 Canterbury Tales, 4, 199 Cardinal Wolsey's Speech to Cromwell, 10, 268 Carlo, the Soldier's Dog, 8, 77 Casabianca, 10, 338 Case of Coincidence, A, 6, 83 Caucus-Race and a Long Tale,
A, 6, 424
Cavalry Song, 10, 319 Chambered Nautilus, The, 10,
249
Character of a Happy Life, The,
10, 340 Charge of the Light Brigade,
The, 10, 321 Charlemagne Revenges Roland,
4, 264 Chased by the Trail, 9, 66 Children's Hour, The, 10, 79 Child's Even Song, A, 10, 43 Christian and Hopeful Are Cap- tives in Doubting Castle, 5,
382
Christian and Hopeful Arrive at the Cœlestial City, 5, 392 Christian Starts on His Journey,
5, 861
Christian's Fight with the Mon- ster Apollyon, 5, 376 Christmas, 10, 95 Christmas Adventure, A, 9, 55 Cid, The, 4, 287
Cinderella, 1,350 Circe's Palace, 3, 315 Cock and the Pearl, The, 1, 501 Colored Band, The, 10, 344
518
INDEX OF TITLES
Come, Let's to Bed, 10, 24 Come, Little Leaves, 10, 187 Come Unto These Yellow Sands,
10, 277 Coming of Sir Galahad, The,
4,45 Concord Hymn, 10, 314 Constant Tin Soldier, The, 1, 317 Contest of the Archers, The, 3,
448
Coral Grove, The, 10, 137 Cost of Loving, The, 9, 225 Cratchits' Christmas Dinner, The,
6, 267 Cressy's New Year's Rent, 9, 359 Crocus, 10, 164 Crossing the Thames without the Aid of Bridge, Boat or Balloon,
5,508 Crow and the Pitcher, The, 1,
498
Cuddle Down, Dolly, 10, 57 Cure of Fear, The, 9, 43
Curly Locks, 10, 24 Daffodil, 10, 212
Daffodils, 10, 211 Daffy-Down-Dilly, 10, 22 Daisies, 10, 253
Daisy's Song, 10, 217 Dancers, The, 10, 98 Danish National Hymn, 10, 295 Daphne, Child of the Morning,
2, 253 Darning Needle, The, 1, 342 Day is Done, The, 10, 246 Daybreak, 10, 232 Deacon Thomas Wales' Will, 6,
116
Death and the Three Revellers,
4, 207 Death of Hector, The, 3, 272 Death of Joan the Maid, 7, 142 Death of Turnus, The, 3, 480 Deeds and Death of Patroclus,
The, 3, 265 Den in the Rocks, A, 8, 418 Departure of Lohengrin, The,
2, 162 Deserted Village, The, 10, 405
Destruction of Sennacherib, The,
10, 366 Diddle, Diddle, Dumpling, My Son John, 10, 29 Dill, 6, 128 Diller, a Dollar, A, 10, 21 Ding, Dong, Bell, 10, 25 Dinkey-Bird, The, 10, 145 Divine Ode, 10, 339 Dixie, 10, 288 Dog and the Dog Dealer, The,
1, 120
Dog and the Shadow, The, 1, 511 Dog in the Manger, The, 1, 503 Doll Doctor, The, 9, 152 Doll in the Grass, The, 1, 140 Don Garcia Defies Don Sancho,
4, 292 Don Garcia Takes Don Sancho
Prisoner, 4, 296 Don Quixote, 4, 383 Don Quixote and the Goatherds,
4, 411
Don Quixote does Penance as did the Knights of Old, 4, 442 Don Quixote Wages a Battle Against a Giant, 4, 490 Down the Incline, 9, 220 Down the Rabbit-Hole, 6, 409 Dragon-Fly and the Water-Lily,
The, 8, 261 Drasnoe Pipe- Line, The, 9, 255 Dreadful Adventure of the Windmills, The, 4, 402 Dreadful Boar, A, 1, 244 Droll Fox-Trap, A, 8, 51 Drum, The, 10, 336 Duel, The, 10, 127 Duel Between Hector and Ajax,
The, 3, 257 Dwarfs and the Fairies, The,
2, 21
Dwellings of the Dead, The, 3,
455
Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard, 10, 159 Elephant has a Bet with the Tiger, The, 2, 436 Embellishment, 6, 278
519
INDEX OF TITLES
Emperor Trojan's Goat's Ears,
The, 1, 223 End of the Penance, The, 4, 470
End of the Quest, The, 4, 65 English Chronicles, 4, 133 Evangeline of Acadia, 7, 306
Eve of Waterloo, The, 10, 313 Fair Maid of Astolat, The, 4, 68 Fair One with Golden Locks,
The, 1, 412 Fair Unknown, The, 4, 175 Fairies' Lullaby, The, 10, 276 Fairy Folk, The, 10, 77 Faithful Little Lizard, The, 8,
161
Famous Fight Between an Eng- lish and a French Frigate, A,
7,344
Farewell, A, 10, 282 Farmer and the Fox, The, 1, 115 Farmer and the Money Lender,
The, 1, 75
Farm-Yard Song, 10, 192 Fatherland, 10, 302 Fearless Saint Genevieve, Patron
Saint of Paris, 7, 60 Fight at the Pass of Thermopylæ,
The, 7, 17 Fight Between Æneas and Tur- nus, The, 3, 473 Fight Between Paris and Menelaus, The, 3, 251 Fight with the Two Giants, The,
4, 182 Finds the Print of a Man's Foot
on the Sand, 5, 194 Fir Tree, The, 1, 323 Fire-Fighter's Dog, A, 8, 109 Fire-Fighter's Rescue from the
Flames, A, 7, 396 Five Queer Brothers, The, 1, 247 Flag Goes By, The, 10, 301 Flight of the Dolls, The, 6, 94 Flowers, The, 10, 126 Flying Trunk, The, 1, 334 Fools and the Drum, The, 1, 116
Foot Race, The, 3, 443 For A' That, 10, 266 Foreign Children, 10, 102
Foreign Lands, 10, 100 Foreman, The, 9, 315 Fore-Room Rug, The, 9, 340 Four Seasons, The, 2, 493 Fox and a Raven, A, 6, 46
Fox and the Cat, The, 1, 502 Fox and the Crow, The, 1, 510
Fox and the Goat, The, 1, 503 Fox and the Grapes, The, 1, 513 Fox and the Stork, The, 1, 497
Fox in the Well, The, 1, 123
Fox Without a Tail, The, 1,
501
French and Italian Chronicles,
Tales from, 4, 229 Friday Rescued from the Canni- bals, 5, 211 Frog and the Ox, The, 1, 500 Frogs Desiring a King, The, 1,
499
Frost, The, 10, 218 Gawain's Adventure in Search of
Owain, 4, 95
Gettysburg Address, The, 10,
284
Giant, The, 10, 64 Giant Who Laughed at a Dwarf,
The, 2, 185
Gift of Athene, The, 2, 250 Giraffe, The, 8, 458
Glass Mountain, The, 1, 190 Glowworm and the Jackdaw, The,
1, 118
God Rest Ye, Merry Gentlemen,
10, 113
Golden Arrow, The, 4, 353
Golden Blackbird, The, 1, 172 Golden Fish, The, 1, 209 Good Play, A, 10, 112 Goose-Girl, The, 1, 470 Goosey, Goosey, Gander, 10, 80 Grand Feast, The, 6, 374 Grasshopper and Cricket, The,
10, 175 Grasshopper and Cricket, The,
10, 178 Gravity Gregg, 9, 171 Gray Collie, The, 9, 328 Great A, Little a, 10, 23
520
INDEX OF TITLES
Great Battle of Roncesvalles,
The, 4, 253
Great Stone Face, The, 6, 293
Green Things Growing, 10, 210 Greenwood Shrift, The, 10, 389 Guardian Angel, The, 2, 183 Gulliver at the Court of Lilliput,
5, 262
Gulliver Captures Fifty of the Enemy's Ships, 5, 272 Gulliver Escapes from the Eagle,
5, 312
Gulliver in the Land of the
Giants, 5, 286
Gulliver is Shipwrecked and Swims for His Life, 5, 249 Gulliver Leaves Lilliput, 5, 278 Gulliver's Travels, 5, 247
Guy Mannering, 5, 458 Half-Chick, The, 1, 180 Hand of Lincoln, The, 10, 298 Hansel and Grethel, 1, 262
Happiest Heart, The, 10, 264 Happy Thought, 10, 91
Hard to Hit, 8, 148 Hare Who Thought the World Had Come to an End, The, 2,
430
Hark, Hark! The Lark! 10, 256 Havelok Hid from the Traitor,
4,157 Havelok Married Against His Will, 4, 163
Havelok Wins Back His King- dom, 4, 167 He Sets Forth on His Adventures, 4, 390 He Who Knew Not Fear, 1, 478
Heart of the Bruce, The, 10,
351
Hearts, Like Doors, Will Open With Ease, 10, 32 Heaving of the Lead, 10, 135 Hercules and the Wagoner, 1,
Hervé Riel, 10, 360 Hey! Diddle, Diddle, 10, 26 Hiawatha's Childhood, 10, 196
Hiawatha's Sailing, 10, 235
Higgley Piggley, 10, 23 Hippopotamus and the Rhi- noceros, The, 8, 456 Hok Lee and the Dwarfs, 1, 238 Holding the Pipe, 9, 128 Hollyhock, 10, 146 Home, Sweet Home, 10, 250 Homeward Voyage of the Greek Hero Ulysses, 3, 299 Hop-O'-My-Thumb, 1, 458 Horatius at the Bridge, 10, 369 Horn in Exile, 4, 145 Horn is Dubbed Knight, 4, 138 Horn the Knight Errant, 4, 142 Horn's Return, 4, 148 Horse that Aroused the Town,
The, 8, 57 Hotspur's Description of a Fop,
10, 278 Housekeeper, The, 10, 177 How Catherine Douglas Tried to Save King James of Scotland,
7, 149
How Did the Canary Do It ?
8, 183
How Don Diego Fought the Three Brothers, 4, 321 How Don Quixote Arrived at an Inn Which He Imagined to be a Castle, 4, 420
How Hilda Got a School, 9, 90 How Jason Lost His Sandal, 3,
88
How Joan the Maid Took Largess
from the English, 7, 130 How June Found Massa Linkum,
7,495
35
How Livia Won the Brooch, 7,
509 How Manawyddan Caught Thief, 4, 112
a
Hercules's Search for the Apples
of Hesperides, 2, 292
How Napoleon Rewarded His Men, 7, 403 Heroes Sail Away in Search of the Golden Fleece, The, 3, 80
How One Went Out to Woo, 1,
154
521
INDEX OF TITLES
How Phaëton Drove the Sun,
2, 330
How Phidias Helped the Image- Maker, 7, 11 How Pwyll Outwitted Gawl, 4,
104
How Robin Hood Drew His
Bow for the Last Time, 4,
378
How Robin Hood Was Paid His
Loan, 4, 351 How Robin Hood Went Back to
the Greenwood, 4, 367 How Sancho Paid the Reckoning at the Inn, 4, 429 How Siegfried Finds Brunhilda,
2, 133 How Siegfried Killed the Dragon,
2, 115
How Sir Galahad Won the Red Cross Shield, 4, 49 How Sir Launcelot Saw the Holy Grail, 4, 63
How Sun, Moon and Wind Went
Out to Dinner, 1, 65
How the Argonauts Sailed to
Colchis, 3, 102
How the Child of the Sea Was
Made Knight, 4, 279 How the Fenris Wolf Was
Chained, 2, 72
How the King Came to Sherwood
Forest, 4, 361 How the Leaves Came Down,
10, 70
How the Queen of the Sky Gave Gifts to Men, 2, 17
How the Sheriff Took Sir Richard
Prisoner, 4, 358
How the Stone-Age Children
Played, 8, 331 How the Tortoise Out-ran the
Deer, 2, 441 How the Turtle Got His Shell, 2,
446
How the Wicked Sons Were
Duped, 1, 81
How They Brought the Good
News from from Ghent to Aix, 10,
331
How They Built the Ship Argo ,
3,98 How Thierry Vanquished Gane- lon, 4, 267
How Thor Went to Jötunheim,
2,26
How Thor's Hammer Was Lost
and Found, 2, 40 Humphry Davy and the Safety- Lamp, 7, 449 Humpty Dumpty, 10, 24 Hunting the Calydonian Boar,
3, 128 Huntsman the Unlucky, 1, 196 Husband Who Was to Mind the House, The, 1, 151 Hushaby, Baby, Thy Cradle is Green, 10, 32 I Had a Little Pony, 10, 31 I Know a Bank, 10, 273 Idea That Went Astray, The, 9,
168
Iduna's Apples of Youth, 2, 51 Imp and the Drum, The, 9, 99 Impudent Guinea-Pig, The, 8,
144
In Canada with a Lynx, 8, 37 In the Castle of the Sorcerers,
4, 189 In the Oven, 9, 186 Incident of the French Camp,
10, 367 Indian Who Lost His Wife, The,
1, 45
Ingratitude, 10, 273
Insignificant Existence, 10, 265 Intelligence of Ants, The, 8, 298 Interpreter Shows Christian
Many Excellent Things, The,
5, 367
Introduction, 1, 3
Introduction to that Spanish Gentleman, An, 4, 385 Italian National Hymn, 10, 294 How Theseus Slays the Minotaur, Ivanhoe, 5, 401
3, 15 Ivry, 10, 347
522
INDEX OF TITLES
Jabez Rockwell's Powder-Horn,
7, 317
Jack and Jill, 10, 28 Jack and the Beanstalk, 1, 444 Jack the Giant-Killer, 1, 374
Jack Sprat, 10, 24 Jackal and the Crocodile, The,
1, 102
Jackal and the Iguana, The, 1,
106
Jackal and the Partridge, The,
1,98 Jay and the Peacock, The, 1,
505
Ladybird, 9, 241 Lambikin, The, 1, 86 Lamplighter, The, 10, 91 Land of Counterpane, The, 10,
96
Land of Story-Books, The, 10, 94 Landing of the Pilgrim Fathers in New England, The, 10, 311 Language of Animals, The, 1,
216
Lark and the Rook, The, 10, 170 Last of the Notable Adventures
of Our Good Knight, The,
4, 509 Laus Deo! 10, 342 Legend of Rata, The, 2, 450 Legend of Saint Christopher,
The, 2, 187 Legend of Sleepy Hollow, The,
2, 386
Life, 10, 264 Lion and the Goat, The, 1, 117
Lion and the Mouse, The, 1, 508
Lion's Share, The, 1, 509 Lions and Tigers, 8, 447 Little Baxters Go Marketing,
The, 9, 18
Little Bo-Peep, 10, 27 Little Boy Blue, 10, 22 Little Cyclone: The Story of a
Grizzly Cub, 8, 9
Little Dandelion, 10, 245 Little Jack Horner, 10, 26
Little John and the Sheriff of
Nottingham, 4, 344 Little Miss Muffet, 10, 26
Little Polly Flinders, 10, 28
Little Nancy Etticote, 10, 22 Little Orphant Annie, 10, 128
Little Post-Boy, The, 7, 485 Little Red Riding-Hood, 1, 359 Lobster- Quadrille, A, 10, 114 Lobster-Quadrille, The, 6, 488 Lochinvar,, 10, 397
of Brabant, 2, 150 Lost Doll, The, 10, 89 Lost Exiles of Texas, The, 7,
234
Jeff the Inquisitive, 8, 138 Jog On, 10, 271 John Gilpin, 10, 117 Jolly Tanner, The, 4, 374 Jonnasen, 9, 179 Journey to the Inn, The, 4, 476 Julius Cæsar Crossing the Rubi- con, 7, 42
July, 10, 213 Jumblies, The, 10, 138
Katy-Did's Party, The, 8, 305 Keeping Store, 10, 179 Kind Hearts Are Gardens, 10, 31
King and de Peafowl, De, 1, 259 King Arthur, 4, 12
King of the Golden River, The,
6, 321
King of Suddenne, The, 4, 153 King Robert of Sicily, 2, 213 Kit Carson's Duel, 7, 454
Kitten, and Falling Leaves, The,
10, 179
Knighting of Don Quixote, The,
4, 395
Knights of the Holy Grail, The,
2, 148
Knowledge, 10, 280 Kynon's Adventure at the Foun- tain, 4, 79
Labor Song, 10, 261
Lady Button-Eyes, 10, 45 Lady Clare, 10, 385 Lady of Kynast, The, 2, 180
Lad Who Went to the North Lohengrin the Champion of Elsa Wind, The, 1, 147
523
INDEX OF TITLES
Lost Wand, A, 6, 183
Lotus- Eaters, The, 3, 301 Love and Death of Queen Dido,
The, 3, 425 Lullaby of an Infant Chief, 10,
54
Mock Turtle's Story, The, 6, 479 Morning, 10, 136 Mortifying Mistake, A, 10, 60 Mother Hubbard and Her Dog,
10, 39
Munchausen, The Startling Adventures of Baron, 5, 503 My Bed is a Boat, 10, 106 My Fight With a Catamount, 8,
26
My Shadow, 10, 88 Naseby, 10, 327 National Hymn of Norway, 10,
293
Nation's Strength, 4, 10, 316 Nausicaa Rescues Ulysses, 3, 357 Nelly's Hospital, 6, 25 New Moon, The, 10, 48 Nightingale and Glow-Worm,
The, 10, 169 Niobe, A Victim of Latona's Jealousy, 2, 278 Noble Burghers of Calais, The,
7,99
Noble Nature, The, 10, 265 North Wind Doth Blow, The, 10,
24
Northmen's Story of How All Things Began, The, 2, 9
Nursery Rhymes, 10, 21 O Canada! 10, 318
O Captain ! My Captain! 10,315 O Little Town of Bethlehem, 10,
92
Oak and the Snail, The, 8, 321 Of Arthur's Birth and How He
Became King, 4, 13 Ogier the Dane, 4, 231
Old Flag, The, 10, 304
Old Gaelic Lullaby, 10, 44 Old Greek Tales, 3, 13
Mabinogion, The, 4, 77 Mad Tea-Party, A, 6, 459 Maiden Who Was Wiser Than
the King, The, 1, 226 Maidenhood, 10, 61 Man in the "Auger Hole," The,
7,356 Man in the Moon, The, 10, 141 Man, the Boy, and the Donkey,
The, 1, 494 Man Who Coveted Washington's Shoes, A, 7, 332 Man Who Spoiled Napoleon's "Destiny," The, 7, 385 Man Without a Country, The, 9,
279
Manabozho, 1, 38 Manabozho is Changed Into a
Wolf, 1, 33 Manabozho is Robbed by the Wolves, 1, 36 Manabozho, the Mischief-Maker,
1, 19
Manuk Del Monte, 9, 269
March, 10, 253 March, 10, 254
Marching Song, 10, 98 Marcus Aurelius, 8, 224
Marjorie's Almanac, 10, 65
Marseillaise Hymn, The, 10, 292 Meadows in Spring, The, 10, 233 Merchant of Venice, The, 5, 351
Mercy, 10, 274 Merlin the Magician, 4, 20 Messenger, The, 7, 434 Midsummer-Night's Dream, A, Old Hare and the Elephants,
5, 331
Milkmaid, The, 10, 194
Milkmaid, The, 1, 507 Mist, The, 8, 336- Mr. O'Leary's Second Love, 9, 370 Mistress Mary, Quite Contrary,
10, 32
The, 2, 434
Old Ironsides, 10, 335 Old Johnny Appleseed, 7, 480 Old King Cole, 10, 28 Old Muskie the Rogue, 8, 209 "Old Mustard" : A Tale of the Western Pioneers, 8, 73
524
INDEX OF TITLES
Old Oaken Bucket, The, 10, 396
Old Woman and the Knight,
The, 4, 201 Old Woman Who Bought a Little
Pig, The, 10, 33
On the Life-Mask of Abraham
Plato: The story of a Cat, 8,
111
Plays of Shakespeare, The, 5,
329
Plot Against the Beautiful Elsa of Brabant, The, 2, 141 Polonius's Advice, 10, 271 Pomegranate Seeds, The, 3, 193 Pool of Tears, The, 6, 416 Powder-Post, 8, 267
On a Slide-Board, 9, 192 On a Tight Rope, 9, 213 On His Blindness, 10, 281
Lincoln, 10, 320
Opportunity, 10, 260
Opportunity, 10, 278 Preface, 3, 9
Oracle Foretells the Coming of Preface, 4, 9
Æneas, The, 3, 467 Preface, 5, 9
Orpheus the Sweet Singer, 2, Preface, 7, 9
273
Preface, 1, 15
Ortruda Plots for Revenge, 2,
158
Ouphe of the Wood, The, 6, 156 Over Hill, Over Dale, 10, 272 Owain's Adventure at the Fountain, 4, 85 Owl, The, 10, 171
Owl and the Pussy-Cat, The, 10,
101
Paradise of Children, The, 2,
342
Parrot That Had Been Trained
to Fire a Cannon, A, 8, 177
Parrots, 8, 461
Patient Griselda, 4, 212
Paul Revere's Ride, 10, 323
Pease Pudding Hot, 10, 25 Peddler's Pack, The, 10, 275
Prelude, 9, 391 Pride Goeth Before a Fall, 1,
78
Prince Ivan and the Gray Wolf,
2, 195
Prince's Dream, The, 6, 171
Princess Micomicona, The, 4,
503
Prisoner Who Would Not Stay in Prison, The, 7, 278 Private Theatricals, The, 6, 56 Procession of the Flowers, 10,
239
Procrastination, 10, 267
Punchkin, 1, 48
Pursued by the Cyclops, 3, 406 Puss in Boots, 1, 367 Pussy, 10, 38 Pussy-Cat, Pussy-Cat, 10, 23 Pegasus, the Winged Horse, 3, Quarrel of the Chiefs, The, 3,
51
Pen and Inkstand, 1, 347
Perfection, 10, 275 Perseverance, 10, 283 Peter: A Cat o' One Tail, 8, 114 Phil's Adventures Among the Animals, 8, 379
Picture-Books in Winter, 10, 93
Pied Piper of Hamelin, The, 10,
147
Pig and Pepper, 6, 449 Pilgrim's Progress, 5, 359 Pitcher of Mignonette, A, 10,
189
240
Queen Bee, The, 8, 279 Queen Dido Welcomes Æneas, 3,
418
Queen of Hearts, The, 10, 29 Queen's Croquet Ground, The, 6,
469
Rab and His Friends, 8, 465 Rabbi Who Found the Diadem,
The, 7, 34
Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill,
The, 6, 432
Race for the Silver Skates, The,
6,7
525
INDEX OF TITLES
Race of the Four Galleys, The,
3, 437
Raggedy Man, The, 10, 143 Rainbow, The, 10, 281 Ransoming of Hector, The, 3,
283
Rat's Wedding, The, 1, 89 Reading Guide, 10, 453 Ready for Duty, 10, 131 Rebecca the Drummer and the
British Warship, 7, 426 Remarkable Voyage of the
Bounty, The, 7, 366 Remnant of the Defeated Army Seeks a New Home, The, 3,
397
Republic, The, 10, 310 Reputation, 10, 272 Rescue from Shipwreck, Α, 7,
418
Retribution, 10, 283 Return of Telemachus, The, 3,
373
Rhodora On Being Asked,
Whence is the Flower, The,
10, 341
Riddle of the Sphinx, The, 2, 222
Ride a Cock-Horse, 10, 30
Ride With a Mad Horse in a
Freight-Car, A, 8, 484 Rime of the Ancient Mariner,
The, 10, 423 Rinaldo and Bayard, 4, 271 Rip Van Winkle, 2, 364 Robert of Lincoln, 10, 172
Robin Goodfellow, 10, 84 Robin Hood, 4, 329 Robin Hood and the Butcher, 4,
370
Robin Hood and the Knight, 4,
331
Robinson Crusoe, 5, 157 Robinson Crusoe is Shipwrecked,
5, 159
Robinson Crusoe Rescued, 5, 222 Rock-a-by Lady, The, 10, 47 Roland for an Oliver, A, 4, 240 Romance of the Swan's Nest,
The, 10, 205
Rose and the Ring, The, 9, 393
Round Table, The, 4, 18
Rule Britannia, 10, 289 Runaway Whale, A, 8, 186 Sad Story of Pyramus and Thisbe, The, 2, 282 Sailor's Song, 10, 248 Sancho Panza's Story of His Visit to the Lady Dulcinea, 4,
485
Sancho's Journey to the Lady Dulcinea, 4, 449 Sandpiper's Trick, The, 8, 180 Saved by a Seal, 8, 197 Scrap, 8, 101 Sea, The, 10, 257 Sea Song, A, 10, 241
Sea, the Fox, and the Wolf, The,
1, 122
Sea-Fight in the Time of Queen
Bess, A, 7, 179
Second String, The, 9, 116 Seven Ages of Man, 10, 270 Seven Times One, 10, 188 Seven Times Two, 10, 199 Seven Times Four, 10, 222 Shepherd's Boy, The, 1, 495 Sheridan's Ride, 10, 308 Ship's of the Desert, 8, 429 Shooting a Stag with Cherry- Stones, 5, 511 Shut-Eye Train, The, 10, 58 Sibyl Speaks to Æneas, The, 3,
450
Siege of Zamora, The, 4, 309
Signs of Rain, 10, 190 Simple Simon, 10, 22 Sindbad the Sailor, 5, 108
Sing a Song of Sixpence, 10, 21 Sir Launcelot and the Adventure of the Castle Perilous, 4,
30
Sir Launcelot and the Falcon, 4,
34
Six Swans, The, 1, 279
Skeleton in Armor, The, 10, 399 Sleep, Baby Sleep! 10, 44 Sleeping Beauty in the Wood,
The, 1, 405
526
INDEX OF TITLES
Sleepy Song, The, 10, 41
Sleigh Song, 10, 186
Small and Early, 10, 81
Small Beginnings, 10, 258 Snap-Dragons-ATale of Christ- mas Eve, 6, 213
Snow-White and Rose-Red, 1,
285
Snuffbox, The, 1, 166
Solomon Grundy, 10, 25 Colomon John Goes for Apples,
6, 102 Solomon's Grouch : The Story of a Bear, 8, 44 Some Animal Friends in Africa,
8, 22
Some Animal Stories, 8, 441 Some of Gulliver's Adventures,
5, 301
Some True Stories of Horses and
Donkeys, 8, 65 Some True Stories of Tigers,
Wolves, Foxes and Bears, 8,
11
Some Voices From the Kitchen Garden, 8, 359
Song, 10, 178 Song, 10, 242 Song of Clover, A, 10, 220 Spanish Chronicle of the Cid,
The, 4, 287
Spanish National Hymn, 10, 296 Spider and the Fly, The, 10, 49 Squire's Bride, The, 1, 136 Squirrel's Story, The, 8, 406 Star-Spangled Banner, The, 10,
286
Startling Adventures of Baron Munchausen, The, 5, 503 Stories from Roman History, 3,
487
Storm in the Distance, A, 10,
221
Story of Cardenio, The, 4, 455 Story of Christopher Columbus for Little Children, A, 7, 166 Story of Cupid and Psyche, The,
2, 318 Story of Decoration Day for the Little Children of To-day, A,
9, 23 Story of Dorothea, The, 4, 463 Story of Fairyfoot, The, 6, 391 Story of a Forest Fire, The, 7,
509
Story of Grace Darling, The, 7,
468
Story of Joan of Arc, the Maid Who Saved France, The, 7, 113 Story of Little Simpleton, 1, 202 Story of Lludd and Llevelys,
The, 4, 125 Story of a Stone, The, 8, 325 Story of Romulus and of Numa,
The, 3, 489 Story of the Three Bears, The,
1,362 Struggles of Charles Goodyear,
The, 7, 475
Succession of the Four Sweet Months, 10, 254 Sugar-Plum Tree, The, 10, 52 Summer Days, 10, 215 Sunken Treasure, The, 7, 228
Suppose, 10, 86 Swallow and the Other Birds,
The, 1, 514
Swarm of Wild Bees, A, 8, 290 Swedish National Air, 10, 293
Sweet and Low, 10, 55 Swimming, 10, 228
Swing, The, 10, 90 Sword Excalibur, The, 4, 22 Table and the Chair, The, 10,
111
Taffy Was a Welshman, 10, 31
Story of Aladdin; or the Won- Tale of Peter Rabbit, The, 8,
derful Lamp, The, 5, 46 443
Story of Alba, The, 3, 500 Story of Arion, The, 2, 261 Story of Balder the Beautiful,
The, 2, 80
Tales from Early English Chron- icles, 4, 133 Tales from French and Italian
Chronicles, 4, 229
527
INDEX OF TITLES
Tales of Robin Hood, 4, 329 Tales of the Trojan War, 3, 235
Tales told by Chaucer's Canter- bury Pilgrims, 4, 199 Taxes of Middlebrook, The, 9, 30 Teaching Fish to Ring Bells, 8,
222 Tempest pest, The, 5, 338 Thanatopsis, 10, 132 Thanksgiving Day, 10, 204 That Sly Old Woodchuck, 8,
151
There is Very Little Trouble, 10,
32
There Was an Old Woman Toss'd
Up in a Basket, 10, 26
There Was an Old Woman Who
Lived in a Shoe, 10, 29 They Come: The Merry Summer Months, 10, 242 Thief and the Fox, The, 1, 114 This is the Way the Ladies Ride,
10, 27
Three Brothers, The, 1, 186
Three Kings of Orient, 10, 105 Three Lemons, The, 2, 500 Three Little Kittens , The, 10,
37
Three Sons, The, 1, 232 Thumbling, 1, 272 Tiger, The, 10, 240 Tiger, the Brahman,
Jackal, The, 1, 82 and the
Tiger, the Fox, and the Hunters,
The, 1, 121 Time to Rise, 10, 90 Tinder-Box, The, 1, 307
To a Skylark, 10, 223 To a Waterfowl, 10, 165 To Market, to Market, to Buy a Fat Pig, 10, 28
Το Milton, 10, 282 To the Fringed Gentian, 10, 214 To the Lady-Bird, 10, 174 To the Lord General Cromwell,
10,280 Toby the Wise, 8, 164 To-day, 10, 87 Tom Thumb, 1, 381
Town Mouse and the Country Mouse, The, 1, 493 Travelling Doll, The, 9, 137 Treason of Ganelon, The, 4,
243
Trial of the Bow, 3, 384
Trick of an Indian Spy, The, 7,
348
Trojan War, The, 3, 237 True Story of a Kidnapped Boy as Told by Himself, The, 7,
265
Try Again, 10, 71 Turning Everything Into Gold,
3, 172
Twelve Labors of Hercules, The,
2, 286
Twenty Froggies, 10, 42 Two Boy Hostages at the Siege of Seringapatam, The, 7, 380 Two Enemies of the Beavers, 8,
393
Two Gifts, The, 6, 354 Two Lizards, The, 1, 256 Two Strange Adventures in
Russia, 5, 509 Ugly Duc Dkling, The, 1, 294 Ulysses and the Cyclops, 3, 305 Ulysses and the Sirens, 3, 353 Ulysses and the Swineherd, 3,
368
Ulysses in His Home, 3, 377 Uncle David's Nonsensical Story,
6, 362
Uncle Dick's Rolf, 8, 94
Uncle Jack's Story, 6, 241 Vengeance of Apollo, The, 2,
255
Vengeance of Ulysses, The, 3,
389
Venus Sends Æneas to Queen
Dido, 3, 412
Village Blacksmith, The, 10,
262
Visit From St. Nicholas, A, 10,
103
Voice of Spring, The, 10, 209 Vowels : An Enigma, The, 10,
79
528
INDEX OF TITLES
Voyagers, 10, 260 Waiting Around, 10, 157 Walrus and the Carpenter, The,
10, 107
Wanderings of Æneas, 3, 395 Warren's Address to the American Soldiers, 10, 303
Watch on the Rhine, The, 10,
290
Watering of the Saplings, The,
2, 433
Wayfaring Song, A, 10, 255 Weather Song, 10, 33 Weeds, The, 8, 351 What Ginger Told Black Beauty,
8,60 What the Wind Brings, 10,
180
When Brer Wolf Have His Corn
Shucking, 2, 487 When I Was a Bachelor, 10,
23
Where Are You Going, My Pretty Maid? 10, 30 Where the Bee Sucks, 10, 274
Which Was the Stronger, the Tortoise, the Tapir, or the
Whale? 2, 444 White Boy Among the Indians,
as Told by Himself, A, 7, 292 Who Has Šeen the Wind? 10,
182
Who Stole the Bird's Nest ? 10,
67
Who Stole the Tarts ? 6, 497
Why Don Sancho Attacked His Neighbors, 4, 289 Why the Bear is Stumpy-Tailed,
1, 155 Why the Diver Duck Has So Few Tail Feathers, 1, 31 Why the Elephant Has Small Eyes, 2, 457 Why the Fish Laughed, 1, 67
Why the Hippopotamus Lives in the Water, 2, 455 Why the Woodpecker Has Red Head Feathers, 1, 26 Wild Robin, 6, 106 Willie Winkie, 10, 63
Wind, The, 10, 181 Wind and the Flowers, The, 8,
369
Wind and the Moon, The, 10,
184
Wind in a Frolic, The, 10, 345
Wind-Song, 10, 182
Windy Nights, 10, 183 Winning of Atalanta, The, 3,
148
Winter-Spirit and His Visitor,
The, 2, 512
Winter- Time, 10, 99
Wishing, 10, 158 Witch in the Stone Boat, The,
1, 158 Wolf and the Lamb, The, 1, 511 Wolsey's Fall, 10, 269 Wonderful Hair, The, 1, 213 Wonderful Quern Stones, The,
2,91 Wooden Horse, The, 3, 295 Woodman and the Serpent, The,
1,507 Woodman, Spare That Tree ! 10,
216
Wooing of the Daughter of the King of Ireland, The, 2, 171 Wreck of the Hesperus, The, 10,
420
Wunzh, the Father of Indian
Corn, 2, 479 Wynken, Blynken, and Nod, 10,
55
Ye Mariners of England, 10,
251
Young Dandelion, 10, 115 Young Night- Thought, 10, 53
529


