
JOHN GILPIN
By William Cowper
OHN GILPIN was a citizen
Of credit and renown,
Atrain-band captain eke was he
Of famous London Town.
John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear,
"Though wedded we have been
These twice ten tedious years, yet we No holiday have seen.
"To-morrow is our wedding-day,
Andwe will then repair
Unto the Bell at Edmonton,
All in achaise and pair.
117
JOHN GILPIN
"My sister and my sister's child,
Myself, and children three,
Will fill the chaise ; so you must ride On horseback after we."
He soon replied, "I do admire Of womankind but one,
And you are she, my dearest dear,
Therefore it shall be done.
"I am a linendraper bold,
As all the world doth know,
Andmy good friend, the Calender,
Will lend his horse to go."
Quoth Mistress Gilpin, "That's well said;
And, for that wine is dear,
Wewill be furnish'd with our own,
Which is both bright and clear."
John Gilpin kiss'd his loving wife;
O'erjoy'd was he to find
That, though on pleasure she was bent,
She had a frugal mind.
The morning came, the chaise was brought,
But yet was not allow'd To drive up to the door, lest all
Should say that she was proud.
So three doors off the chaise was stay'd,
Where they did all get in,
Six precious souls, and all agog To dash through thick and thin.
118
JOHN GILPIN
Smackwent the whip, round went the wheels ;
Were never folks so glad:
The stones did rattle underneath,
As if Cheapside were mad.
John Gilpin, at his horse's side,
Seized fast the flowing mane,
Andup he got, in haste to ride,
But soon came down again;
For saddle-tree scarce reach'd had he,
His journey to begin,
When, turning round his head, he saw
Three customers come in.
So down he came; for loss of time Although it grieved him sore,
Yet loss of pence, full well he knew,
Would trouble him much more.
'Twas long before the customers
Were suited to their mind,
When Betty, screaming, came downstairs,
"The wine is left behind!"
"Good lack!" quoth he, "yet bring it me,
My leathern belt likewise,
In which I bear my trusty sword
When I do exercise."
Now Mistress Gilpin (careful soul!)
Had two stone-bottles found,
To hold the liquor that she loved,
Andkeep it safe and sound.
119
JOHN GILPIN
Each bottle had a curling ear,
Through which the belt he drew,
And hung a bottle on each side,
To make his balance true.
Then over all, that he might be
Equipp'd from top to toe,
His long red cloak, well-brush'd and neat,
He manfully did throw.
Now see him mounted once again
Upon his nimble steed,
Full slowly pacing o'er the stones,
With caution and good heed.
But finding soon a smoother road
Beneath his well-shod feet,
The snorting beast began to trot,
Which gall'd him in his seat.
So, "Fair and softly!" John he cried,
But John he cried in vain ;
That trot became agallop soon,
In spite of curb and rein.
So stooping down, as needs he must Who cannot sit upright,
He grasp'd the mane with both his hands,
And eke with all his might.
His horse, who never in that sort
Had handled been before,
What thing uponhis back had got Did wonder more and more.
120
JOHN GILPIN
Away went Gilpin, neck or nought;
Away went hat and wig;
He little dreamt, when he set out,
Of running such a rig.
The wind did blow, the cloak did fly
Like streamer long and gay,
Till loop and button failing both,
At last it flew away.
Then might all people well discern The bottles he had slung;
Abottle swinging at each side,
Ashath been said or sung.
The dogs did bark, the children scream'd,
Up flew the windows all ;
Andevery soul cried out: "Well done!"
As loud as he could bawl.
Awaywent Gilpin-who but he?
His fame soon spread around,
"He carries weight; he rides a race!
'Tis for a thousand pound! "
And still as fast as he drew near,
'Twas wonderful to view
How in a trice the turnpike men
Their gates wide open threw.
And now, as he went bowing down His reeking head full low,
The bottles twain behind his back
Were shatter'd at a blow.
121
JOHN GILPIN
Down ran the wine into the road,
Most piteous to be seen,
Which made his horse's flanks to smoke
As they had basted been.
But still he seem'd to carry weight,
With leathern girdle braced ;
For all might see the bottle-necks
Still dangling at his waist.
Thus all through merry Islington These gambols he did play,
Until he came unto the Wash
Of Edmonton so gay ;
And there he threw the Wash about
On both sides of the way,
Just like unto a trundling mop,
Or awild goose at play.
AtEdmonton his loving wife From the balcony spied Her tender husband, wondering much To see how he did ride.
"Stop, stop, John Gilpin! Here's the house ! "
They all at once did cry ;
"The dinner waits, and we are tired ;"
Said Gilpin, "So am I ! "
But yet his horse was not a whit Inclined to tarry there ;
For why ? his owner had a house Full ten miles off, at Ware.
122
JOHN GILPIN
So like an arrow swift he flew,
Shot by an archer strong;
So did he fly-which brings me to
The middle of my song.
Awaywent Gilpin, out of breath,
And sore against his will,
Till at his friend the Calender's
His horse at last stood still.
The Calender, amazed to see
His neighbor in such trim,
Laid down his pipe, flew to the gate,
And thus accosted him.
"What news? what news? your tidings tell !
Tell me you must and shallSay, why bare-headed you are come,
Orwhy you come at all?"
NowGilpin had apleasant wit,
And loved a timely joke;
And thus unto the Calender
In merry guise he spoke :
"I came, because your horse would come;
And, if I well forbode,
Myhat and wig will soon be here,
They are uponthe road."
The Calender, right glad to find His friend in merry pin,
Return'd him not asingle word,
But to the house went in;
123
JOHN GILPIN
Whence straight he came, with hat and wig,
Awig that flow'd behind ;
Ahat not much the worse for wear;
Each comely in its kind.
He held them up, and in his turn Thus show'd his ready wit :
"My head is twice as big as yours,
They therefore needs must fit.
"But let me scrape the dirt away,
That hangs upon your face;
And stop and eat, for well you may Be in ahungry case."
Said John, "It is my wedding-day,
And all the world would stare,
If wife should dine at Edmonton,
And I should dine at Ware!"
So, turning to his horse, he said,
"I am in haste to dine;
'Twas for your pleasure you came here,
You shall goback for mine."
Ah, luckless speech, and bootless boast!
For which he paid full dear;
For, while he spake, abraying ass Did sing most loud and clear;
Whereat his horse did snort, as he
Had heard a lion roar,
And ' gallop'd off with all his might,
Ashe had done before.
124
JOHN GILPIN
Awaywent Gilpin, and away Went Gilpin's hat and wig;
He lost them sooner than at first,
For why?-they were too big.
Now Mistress Gilpin, when she saw Her husband posting down Into the country far away,
She pull'd out half-a-crown ;
And thus unto the youth she said,
That drove them to the Bell,
"This shall be yours, when you bring back My husband safe and well. "
The youth did ride, and soon did meet John coming back amain;
Whom in a trice he tried to stop,
By catching at his rein;
But not performing what he meant,
And gladly would have done,
The frighten'd steed he frighten'd more,
And made him faster run.
Away went Gilpin, and away Went postboy at his heels,
The postboy's horse right glad to miss
The lumbering of the wheels.
Six gentlemen upon the road Thus seeing Gilpin fly,
With postboy scampering in the rear They raised the hue and cry:-
125
THE FLOWERS
"Stop thief !-stop thief !-a highwayman! "
Not one of them was mute ;
Andall and each that pass'd that way Did join in the pursuit.
And now the turnpike gates again Flew open in short space:
The toll-men thinking as before That Gilpin rode a race.
And so he did, and won it too!
Forhe got first to town;
Nor stopp'd till where he had got up
Hedid again get down.
-Now let us sing, Long live the King,
And Gilpin, long live he;
And, when he next doth ride abroad,
May I be there to see!
A
THE FLOWERS
By Robert Louis Stevenson
LL the names I know from nurse:
Gardener's garters, Shepherd's purse,
Bachelor's buttons, Lady's smock,
And the Lady Hollyhock.
Fairy places, fairy things,
Fairy woods where the wild bee wings,
Tiny trees for tiny dames- These must all be fairy names !
126
THE DUEL
T
Tiny woods below whose boughs Shady fairies weave a house ;
Tiny tree-tops, rose or thyme,
Where the braver fairies climb !
Fair are grown-up people's trees,
But the fairest woods are these ;
Where, if I were not so tall,
I should live for good and all.
THE DUEL
By Eugene Field
HE gingham dog and the calico cat Side by side on the table sat;
'Twas half-past twelve, and (what do you think! )
Nor one nor t'other had slept a wink!
The old Dutch clock and the Chinese plate Appeared to know as sure as fate There was going to be a terrible spat.
( I wasn't there; Isimply state
What was told me by the Chinese plate! )
The gingham dog went "Bow-wow-wow!"
Andthecalico cat replied "Mee-ow! "
The air was littered, an hour or so,
With bits of gingham and calico,
While the old Dutch clock in the chimney-place
Up with its hands before its face,
For it always dreaded a family row!
(Now mind: I'm only telling you What the old Dutch clock declares is true!)
127
LITTLE ORPHANT ANNIE
The Chinese plate looked very blue,
And wailed, "Oh, dear! what shall we do?"
But the gingham dog and the calico cat
Wallowed this way and tumbled that,
Employing every tooth and claw In the awfullest way you ever saw- And, oh! how the gingham and calico flew!
(Don't fancy I exaggerate!
Igot my news from the Chinese plate! )
Next morning, where the two had sat,
They found no trace of dog or cat ;
And some folks think unto this day
That burglars stole that pair away!
But the truth about the cat and pup Is this : they ate each other up!
Nowwhat do you really think of that!
( The old Dutch clock it told me so,
And that is how I came to know. )
LITTLE ORPHANT ANNIE
By James Whitcomb Riley
ITTLE Orphant Annie's come to our house
☑ to stay,
An' wash the cups and saucers up, an' brush the crumbs away,
An' shoo the chickens off the porch, an' dust the hearth, an' sweep,
An' make the fire, an' bake the bread, an' earn her board-an' -keep ;
128
LITTLE ORPHANT ANNIE
An' all us other children, when the supper things
is done,
We set around the kitchen fire an' has the mostest
fun
A-list'nin' to the witch-tales 'at Annie tells about,
An' the Gobble-uns 'at gits you Ef you
Don't
Watch
Out!
Onc't they was a little boy wouldn't say his pray'rsAn' when he went to bed at night, away up-stairs,
His mammy heerd him holler, an' his daddy heerd him bawl,
An' when they turn't the kivvers down, he wasn't
there at all!
An' they seeked him in the rafter-room, an' cubby- hole, an' press,
An' seeked him up the chimbly flue, an' ever'- wheres, I guess ;
But all they ever found was thist his pants an'
roundabout!
An' the Gobble-uns'll git you
Efyou
Don't
Watch
Out!
An one time a little girl 'ud allus laugh an'
An' make fun of ever' one, an' all her blood- grin,
an'-kin,
129
LITTLE ORPHANT ANNIE
An' onc't when they was "company," an' old folks
was there,
She mocked 'em an' shocked 'em, an' said she
didn't care!
An' thist as she kicked her heels, an' turn't to run
an' hide,
They was two great big Black Things a-standin'
byher side,
An' they snatched her through the ceilin' 'fore she knowed what she's about!
An' the Gobble-uns'll git you Efyou
Don't
Watch
Out!
An' little Orphant Annie says, when the blaze is blue,
An' the lampwick sputters, an' the wind goes woo-oo !
An' youhearthe crickets quit, an' the moon is gray,
An' the lightnin' -bugs indewis all squenched away- You better mindyer parents, an' yer teachers fond an' dear,
An' churish them 'at loves you, an' dry the or- phant's tear,
An' he'p the pore an' needy ones 'at clusters all about,
Er the Gobble-uns'll git you
Efyou
Don't
Watch
Out!
t
130
MD.SPOONER
TRIPPING AND SKIPPING, RAN MERRILY AFTER
THE WONDERFUL MUSIC WITH SHOUTING AND LAUGHTER
-page 154 F'rom the painting by M. Dibdin Spooner

D
READY FOR DUTY
By Anna B. Warner
AFFY-DOWN-DILLY came up in the
cold,
Through the brown mould,
Although the March breezes blew keen on her
face,
Although the white snow lay on many aplace.
Daffy-Down-Dilly had heard under ground The sweet, rushing sound
Of the streams, as they burst off their white winter
chainsOf the whistling spring winds, and the pattering
rains.
"Now then," thought Daffy, deep down in her heart,
"It's time I should start. "
So she pushed her soft leaves through the hard frozen ground,
Quite up to the surface and then she looked round.
There was snow all about her, gray clouds over- head;
The trees all looked dead:
Thenhow do you think Daffy-Down-Dilly felt,
When the sun would not shine, and the ice would
not melt?
Jun. Cl-10 131 5
THANATOPSIS
"Cold weather," thought Daffy, still working away;
"The earth's hard to-day;
There's but a half-inch of my leaves to be seen,
And two-thirds of that is more yellow than green.
"I can't do much yet, but I'll do what I can;
It's well I began;
For unless I can manage to lift up my head,
The people will think that Spring herself's dead."
So little by little she brought her leaves out,
All clustered about ;
And then her bright flowers began to unfold,
Till Daffy stood robed in her spring green and gold.
Oh, Daffy-Down-Dilly, so brave and so true!
I wish all were like you :
So ready for duty in all sorts of weather,
And showing forth courage and beauty together.
T
THANATOPSIS
By William Cullen Bryant
O him who, in the love of Nature, holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks Avarious language: for his gayer hours She has a voice of gladness, and a smile And eloquence of beauty ; and she glides
Into his darker musings with a mild
132
THANATOPSIS
And gentle sympathy, that steals away Their sharpness, ere he is aware. When thoughts
Of the last bitter hour come like a blight
Over thy spirit, and sad images
Of the stern agony, and shroud, and pall,
And breathless darkness, and the narrow house,
Make thee to shudder, and grow sick at heart,
Go forth under the open sky, and list
To Nature's teachings, while from all around- Earth and her waters, and the depths of airComes a still voice-Yet a few days, and thee
The all-beholding sun shall see no more
In all his course ; nor yet in the cold ground,
Where thy pale form was laid, with many tears,
Nor in the embrace of ocean, shall exist
Thy image. Earth, that nourished thee, shall claim
Thy growth, to be resolved to earth again;
And, lost each human trace, surrendering up
Thine individual being, shalt thou go To mix forever with the elements ;
To be a brother to the insensible rock,
And to the sluggish clod, which the rude swain Turns with his share, and treads upon. The oak Shall send his roots abroad, and pierce thy mould.
Yet not to thine eternal resting-place
Shalt thou retire alone-nor couldst thou wish
Couch more magnificent. Thou shalt lie down
With patriarchs of the infant world-with kings,
The powerful of the earth-the wise, the good,
Fair forms, and hoary seers of ages past,
All in one mighty sepulcher. The hills,
Rock-ribbed, and ancient as the sun; the vales
133
THANATOPSIS
Stretching in pensive quietness between ;
The venerable woods; rivers that move
Inmajesty, and the complaining brooks,
That make the meadows green; and, poured round all,
Old ocean's gray and melancholy waste- Arebut the solemn decorations all
Of the great tomb of man! The golden sun,
The planets, all the infinite host of heaven,
Are shining on the sad abodes of death,
Through the still lapse of ages. All that tread The globe are but a handful to the tribes
That slumber in its bosom. Take the wings
Of morning, traverse Barca's desert sands,
Or lose thyself in the continuous woods Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound Save his own dashings-yet the dead are there!
And millions in those solitudes, since first
The flight of years began, have laid them down In their last sleep-the dead reign there alone !
So shalt thou rest; and what if thou withdraw
In silence from the living, and no friend
Take note of thy departure ? All that breathe Will share thy destiny. The gay will laugh When thou art gone, the solemn brood of care Plod on, and each one, as before, will chase
His favorite phantom; yet all these shall leave Their mirth and their employments, and shall come
And make their bed with thee. As the long
train
Of ages glide away, the sons of men- Theyouth in life's green spring, and he who goes In the full strength of years, matron and maid,
134
HEAVING OF THE LEAD
And the sweet babe, and the gray-headed manShall, one by one, be gathered to thy side Bythose who in their turn shall follow them.
So live, that when thy summons comes to join The innumerable caravan that moves
To the pale realms of shade, where each shall take His chamber in the silent halls of death,
Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night,
Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.
HEAVING OF THE LEAD
F
By Charles Dibdin
OR England when with favoring gale
Our gallant ship up channel steered,
And, scudding under easy sail,
The high blue western land appeared;
To heave the lead the seaman sprung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
"By the deep-nine !"
Andbearing up to gain the port,
Some well-known object kept in view- An abbey- tower, a harbor-fort,
Or beacon to the vessel true;
While oft the lead the seaman flung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
"By the mark-seven ! "
135
MORNING
B
And as the much-loved shore we near,
With transport we behold the roof
Where dwelt a friend or partner dear,
Of faith and love a matchless proof.
The lead once more the seaman flung,
And to the watchful pilot sung,
"Quarter less-five !"
Now to her berth the ship draws nigh :
We shorten sail-she feels the tide-
" Stand clear the cable" is the cryThe anchor's gone; we safely ride.. The watch is set, and through the night
Wehear the seamen with delight
Proclaim-"All's well! "
MORNING
By James Beattie
UT who the melodies of morn can tell?
The wild brook babbling down the mountain
side;
The lowing herd; the sheepfold's simple bell ;
The pipe of early shepherd dim descried
In the lone valley; echoing far and wide The clamorous horn along the cliffs above;
The hollow murmur of the ocean tide;
The hum of bees, the linnet's lay of love,
And the full choir that wakes the universal grove.
The cottage curs at early pilgrim bark;
Crowned with her pail the tripping milkmaid sings ;
The whistling ploughman stalks afield; and, hark !
136
THE CORAL GROVE
Down the rough slope the ponderous wagon rings;
Through rustling corn the hare astonished springs ;
Slow tolls the village-clock the drowsy hour ;
The partridge bursts away on whirring wings ;
Deep mourns the turtle in sequestered bower,
And shrill lark carols clear from her aerial tower.
D
THE CORAL GROVE
EEP in
By James Gates Percival
the wave is a coral grove,
Where the purple mullet and gold-fish rove;
Where the sea-flower spreads its leaves of blue
That never are wet with falling dew,
But in bright and changeful beauty shine Far down in the green and glassy brine.
The floor is of sand, like the mountain drift,
And the pearl-shells spangle the flinty snow;
From coral rocks the sea-plants lift
Their boughs, where the tides and billows flow;
The water is calm and still below,
For the winds and waves are absent there,
Andthe sands are bright as the stars that glow In the motionless fields of upper air.
There, with its waving blade of green,
The sea-flag streams through the silent water,
And the crimson leaf of the dulse is seen
To blush, like a banner bathed in slaughter.
There, with a light and easy motion,
The fan-coral sweeps through the clear, deep sea ;
And the yellow and scarlet tufts of ocean
Are bending like corn on the upland lea,
137
THE JUMBLIES
And life, in rare and beautiful forms,
Is sporting amid those bowers of stone,
And is safe when the wrathful spirit of storms
Has made the top of the wave his own.
And when the ship from his fury flies,
Where the myriad voices of ocean roar,
When the wind-god frowns in the murky skies,
And demons are waiting the wreck on shore,
Then, far below, in the peaceful sea,
The purple mullet and gold-fish rove,
Where the waters murmur tranquilly,
Through the bending twigs of the coral grove.
THE JUMBLIES
By Edward Lear
HEY went to sea in THEY a sieve, they did,
sieve they went to sea:
In spite of all their friends could say,
On awinter's morn, on a stormy day,
In asieve they went to sea.
And when the sieve turned round and round,
Andevery one cried, "You'll all be drowned!"
They called aloud, "Our sieve ain't big ;
But we don't care a button, we don't care a fig:
In a sieve we'll go to sea!"
Far and few, far and few,
Are the lands where the Jumblies live ;
Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,
And they went to sea in a sieve.
138
THE JUMBLIES
They sailed awayin asieve, they did,
In a sieve they sailed so fast,
With only a beautiful pea-green veil Tied with a ribbon, by way of a sail,
To a small tobacco-pipe mast.
And every one said who saw them go,
"Oh! won't they be soon upset, you know?
For the sky is so dark, and the voyage is long;
And, happen what may, it's extremely wrong In a sieve to sail so fast."
Far and few, far and few,
Are the lands where the Jumblies live ;
Their heads are green, and their hands
are blue,
And they went to sea in a sieve.
The water it soon came in, it did,
The water it soon came in;
So, to keep them dry, they wrapped their feet
In a pinky paper all folded neat;
And they fastened it down with a pin.
And they passed the night in a crockery jar ;
And each of them said: "How wise we are!
Though the sky be dark and the voyage long Yet we never can think we were rash or
wrong,
While round in our sieve we spin."
Far and few, far and few,
Are the lands where the Jumblies live;
Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,
And they went to sea in a sieve.
139
THE JUMBLIES
And all night long they sailed away;
And when the sun went down,
They whistled and warbled a moony song
To the echoing sound of a coppery gong,
In the shade of the mountains brown.
"O Timballoo! How happy we are
When we live in a sieve and a crockery jar!
And all night long, in the moonlight pale,
We sail away with a pea-green sail
In the shade of the mountains brown. "
Far and few, far and few,
Are the lands where the Jumblies
live ;
Their heads are green, and their hands
are blue,
And they went to sea in a sieve.
They sailed to the Western Sea, they did- To a land all covered with trees ;
And they bought an owl, and a useful cart,
And a pound of rice, and a cranberry-tart,
And a hive of silvery bees ;
And they bought a pig, and some green jackdaws,
And a lovely monkey with lollipop paws.
And forty bottles of ring-bo-ree,
And no end of Stilton cheese.
Far and few, far and few,
Are the lands where the Jumblies
live ;
Their heads are green, and their hands
are blue,
And they went to sea in a sieve.
140
THE MAN IN THE MOON
Andin twenty years they all came back- In twenty years or more ;
And every one said, "How tall they've grown!
For they've been to the Lakes, and the Torrible
Zone,
And the hills of the Chankly Bore."
And they drank their health, and gave them a feast
Of dumplings made of beautiful yeast ;
And every one said, "If we only live,
We, too, will go to sea in a sieve,
To the hills of the Chankly Bore."
Far and few, far and few,
Are the lands where the Jumblies live ;
Their heads are green, and their hands
are blue,
And they went to sea in a sieve.
THE MAN IN THE MOON
By James Whitcomb Riley
AID The Raggedy Man, on a hot afternoon: SAID"MyTH!
Sakes!
What a lot o' mistakes
Some little folks makes on The Man in the Moon!
But people that's be'n to see him, like me,
And calls on him frequent and intimuttiy,
Might drop a few facts that would interest you Clean!
Through !-
If you wanted 'em toSome actual facts that might interest you!
1
141
THE MAN IN THE MOON
"O The Man in the Moon has a crick in his back;
Whee!
Whimm!
Ain't you sorry for him?
Andamole onhis nose that is purple and black;
And his eyes are so weak that they water and run
If he dares to dream even he looks at the sunSo he jes dreams of stars, as the doctors advise- My!
Eyes !
But isn't he wiseTo jes dream of stars, as the doctors advise?
"And The Man in the Moonhas aboil on his earWhee!
Whing!
What a singular thing!
Iknow! but these facts are authentic, mydear- There's a boil onhis ear; and a corn on his chinHe calls it a dimple-but dimples stick in; -
Yet it might be a dimple turned over, you know!
Whang!
Ho!
Why, certainly so!-
It might be a dimple turned over, you know!
"And The Manin the Moon has a rheumatic kneeGee!
Whizz!
What a pity that is!
And his toes have worked round where his heels
ought to be.—
So whenever he wants to go north he goes south,
1
142
THE RAGGEDY MAN
And comes back with porridge-crumbs all round his mouth,
Andhe brushes them off with a Japanese fan,
Whing!
Whann!
What a marvellous man!
What a very remarkably marvellous man!
"And The Manin the Moon," sighed The Raggedy Man,
"Gits!
So!
Sullonesome, you know- Up there by hisse'f sence creation began!
That when I call on him and then come away,
Hegrabs me and holds me and begs me to stay- Till-Well! if it wasn't fer Jimmy-cum-jim,
Dadd!
Limb!
I'd go pardners with him- Jes jump my job here and be pardners with him!"
Ο
THE RAGGEDY MAN
By James Whitcomb Riley
THE Raggedy Man! He works fer Pa;
An' he's the goodest man ever you saw!
He comes to our house every day,
An' waters the horses, an' feeds ' em hay;
An' he opens the shed-an' we all ist laugh When he drives out our little old wobble-ly calf;
143
THE RAGGEDY MAN
An' nen-ef our hired girl says he canHe milks the cow fer 'Lizabuth Ann.-
Ain't he a' awful kind Raggedy Man?
Raggedy ! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
W'y, The Raggedy Man-he's ist so good
He splits the kindlin' an' chops the wood;
An' nen he spades in our garden, too,
An' does most things 'at boys can't do.-
He clumbed clean up in our big treeAn' shooked a' apple down fer meAn' nother'n too, fer 'Lizabuth AnnAn' nother'n, too, fer The Raggedy Man.-
Ain't he a' awful kind Raggedy Man?
Raggedy! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
An' The Raggedy Man, he knows most rhymes An' tells ' em ef I be good, sometimes :
Knows 'bout Giunts, an' Griffuns, an' Elves,
An' the Squidgicum-Squees ' at swallers therselves !
An', wite by the pump in our pasture-lot,
He showed me the hole ' at the Wunks is got,
'At lives 'way deep in the ground, an' can Turn into me, er 'Lizabuth Ann!
Ain't he a funny old Raggedy Man?
Raggedy ! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
The Raggedy Man-one time when he Was makin' a little bow-'n- 'orry fer me,
Says, "When you're big like your Pa is,
Air you go' to keep a fine store like his- An' be a rich merchunt-an' wear fine clothes ?-
Er what air you go' to be, goodness knows ! "
1
144
THE DINKEY- BIRD
An' nen he laughed at 'Lizabuth Ann,
An' I says, " 'M go' to be a Raggedy Man!
I'm ist go' to be a nice Raggedy Man!"
Raggedy ! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
I
THE DINKEY-BIRD
By Eugene Field
N an ocean, 'way out yonder (As all sapient people know) ,
Is the land of Wonder-Wander,
Whither children love to go ;
It's their playing, romping, swinging,
That give great joy to me While the Dinkey-Bird goes singing In the amfalula tree.
There the gumdrops grow like cherries,
And taffy's thick as peas
Caramels you pick like berries
When, and where, and how you please;
Big red sugar-plums are clinging To the cliffs beside that sea
Where the Dinkey-Bird is singing
In the amfalula tree.
So when children shout and scamper And make merry all the day,
When there's naught to put a damper
To the ardor of their play;
145
HOLLYHOCK
When I hear their laughter ringing,
Then I'm sure as sure can be
That the Dinkey-Bird is singing In the amfalula tree.
For the Dinkey-Bird's bravuras
And staccatos are so sweetHis roulades, appoggiaturas,
And robustos so complete,
That the youth of every nationBe they near or far away- Have especial delectation
In that gladsome roundelay.
Their eyes grow bright and brighter,
Their lungs begin to crow,
Their hearts get light and lighter,
And their cheeks are all aglow;
For an echo cometh bringing
The news to all and me,
That the Dinkey-Bird is singing In the amfalula trec.
T
HOLLYHOCK
By Sarah J. Day
HE stately Lady Hollyhock
Has graced my garden-bed for years,
Sedately stiffened in a frock
All frills and ruffles to her ears ;
For at the fashions one may mock
When one is born a Hollyhock.
146
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
Her gay companions creep and twine And riot in the summer breeze ;
But she doth haughtily decline To join in common sports like these ;
Such indecorum needs must shock
Awell-bred, well-starched Hollyhock.
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
H
By Robert Browning
AMELIN Town's in Brunswick,
By famous Hanover city;
The River Weser, deep and wide,
Washes its walls on the southern side;
Apleasanter spot you never spied ;
But, when begins my ditty,
Almost five hundred years ago,
To see the townsfolk suffer so,
From vermin, was a pity.
Rats!
They fought the dogs and killed the cats,
And bit the babies in the cradles,
And ate the cheeses out of the vats,
And licked the soup from the cooks' own ladles,
Split open the kegs of salted sprats,
Made nests inside men's Sunday hats,
Andeven spoiled the women's chats,
By drowning their speaking With shrieking and squeaking
In fifty different sharps and flats.
1
147
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
At last the people in a body To the Town Hall came flocking ;
" Tis clear," cried they, " our Mayor's a noddy ;
And as for our Corporation-shocking To think we buy gowns lined with ermine For dolts that can't or won't determine
What's best to rid us of our vermin !
You hope, because you're old and obese,
To find in the furry civic robe ease ?
Rouse up, sirs ! Give your brains a racking To find the remedy we're lacking,
Or, sure as fate, we'll send you packing ! "
At this the Mayor and Corporation Quaked with a mighty consternation.
Anhour they sat in council ;
At length the Mayor broke silence ;
"For a guilder I'd my ermine gown sell ;
I wish I were a mile hence !
It's easy to bid one rack one's brainI'm sure my poor head aches again,
I've scratched it so, and all in vain.
Oh for a trap, a trap, a trap ! "
Just as he said this, what should hap At the chamber door, but a gentle tap ?
" Bless us ! " cried the Mayor, "what's that?"
(With the Corporation as he sat,
Looking little though wondrous fat ;
Nor brighter was his eye, nor moister
Than a too-long-opened oyster,
Save when at noon his paunch grew mutinous For a plate of turtle green and glutinous.)
" Only a scraping of shoes on the mat ?
1
148
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
Anything like the sound of a rat
Makes myheart go pit-a-pat !"
"Come in!" the Mayor cried, looking bigger,
And in did come the strangest figure!
His queer long coat, from heel to head Was half of yellow and half of red,
And he himself was tall and thin,
With sharp blue eyes, each like a pin,
And light loose hair, yet swarthy skin,
No tuft on cheek nor beard on chin,
But lips where smiles went out and in;
There was no guessing his kith and kin:
Andnobody could enough admire The tall man and his quaint attire.
Quoth one: "It's as if my great-grandsire,
Starting up at the Trump of Doom's tone,
Had walked this way from his painted tomb- stone!"
He advanced to the council table:
And, "Please your honors," said he, "I'm
able,
Bymeans of a secret charm, to draw All creatures living beneath the sun,
That creep, or swim, or fly, or run,
After me so as you never saw!
And I chiefly use my charm
On creatures that do people harm,
The mole, the toad, the newt, the viper;
And people call me the Pied Piper. "
(And here they noticed round his neck
Ascarf of red and yellow stripe 149
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
To match his coat of the selfsame cheque;
And at the scarf's end hung a pipe;
And his fingers, they noticed, were ever straying As if impatient to be playing
Uponhis pipe, as low it dangled Over his vesture so old-fangled. )
"Yet," said he, "poor piper as I am,
In Tartary I freed the Cham,
Last June, from his huge swarm of gnats;
I eased in Asia the Nizam
Of amonstrous brood of vampyre bats:
And as for what your brain bewilders,
If I can rid your town of rats Will you give me a thousand guilders?"
"One? fifty thousand! "-was the exclamation
Of the astonished Mayor and Corporation.
Into the street the Piper stept,
Smiling first a little smile,
As if he knew what magic slept In his quiet pipe the while;
Then, like a musical adept,
To blow the pipe his lips he wrinkled,
Andgreenandblue his sharp eyes twinkled,
Like a candle-flame where salt is sprinkled;
Andere three shrill notes the pipehad uttered,
You heard as if an army muttered ;
And the muttering grew to a grumbling;
And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumb- ling;
And out of the houses the rats came tumbling.
Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats,
Brown rats, black rats, gray rats, tawny rats,
150
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
Grave old plodders, gay young friskers,
Fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins,
Cocking tails, and pricking whiskers,
Families by tens and dozens,
Brothers, sisters, husbands, wivesFollowed the Piper for their lives.
From street to street he piped, advancing,
And step for step they followed dancing,
Until they came to the River Weser,
Wherein all plunged and perished!
-Save one, who stood as Julius Cæsar,
Swam across and lived to carry
(As he, the manuscript he cherished)
To Rat-land home his commentary :
Which was, "At the first shrill notes of the pipe,
Iheard a sound as of scraping tripe,
And putting apples, wondrous ripe,
Into a cider-press's gripe :
Andmoving away of pickle-tub boards,
And aleaving ajar of conserve-cupboards,
And adrawing the corks of train-oil-flasks,
Andabreaking the hoops of butter-casks:
And it seemed as if a voice
(Sweeter far than by harp or by psaltery Is breathed) called out, 'Oh, rats, rejoice !
The world is grown to one vast drysaltery!
So munch on, crunch on, take your nuncheon,
Breakfast, supper, dinner, luncheon!'
Andjust as a bulky sugar-puncheon,
All ready staved, like agreat sun shone Glorious, scarce an inch before me,
Just as methought it said, 'Come, bore mel -Ifound the Weser rolling o'er me."
151
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
You should have heard the Hamelin people Ringing the bells till they rocked the steeple.
"Go," cried the Mayor, "and get long poles,
Poke out the nests, and block up the holes!
Consult with carpenters and builders,
And leave in our town not even a trace
Of the rats ! " When suddenly, up the face Of the Piper perked in the market-place,
With a, "First, if you please, my thousand guilders !"
Athousand guilders! The Mayor looked blue;
So did the Corporation, too.
For council dinners made rare havoc
With Claret, Moselle, Vin-de-Grave, Hock;
And half the money would replenish Their cellar's biggest butt with Rhenish.
To pay this sum to awandering fellow,
With agypsy coat of red andyellow!
"Beside," quoth the Mayor, with a knowing wink,
"Our business was done at the river's brink;
We saw with our eyes the vermin sink,
And what's dead can't come to life, I think.
So friend, we're not the folks to shrink From the duty of giving you something to drink,
And a matter of money to put in your poke;
But, as for the guilders, what we spoke Of them, as you very well know, was in joke.
Beside, our losses have made us thrifty.
thousand guilders! Come, take fifty!
152
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
The Piper's face fell, and he cried,
"No trifling ! I can't wait, beside!
I've promised to visit by dinner-time
Bagdad, and accept the prime Of the Head-Cook's pottage, all he's rich in,
For having left, in the Caliph's kitchen,
Of a nest of scorpions no survivor :
With him I proved no bargain-driver,
With you, don't think I'll bate a stiver !
And folks who put me in a passion
May find me pipe after another fashion."
"How! " cried the Mayor, "d'ye think I'll brook Being worse treated than a cook?
Insulted by a lazy ribald
With idle pipe and vesture piebald?
You threaten us, fellow? Do your worst,
Blow your pipe there till you burst !"
Once more he stept into the street,
And to his lips again Laid his long pipe of smooth straight cane;
And ere he blew three notes (such sweet Soft notes as yet musician's cunning
Never gave the enraptured air )
There was a rustling that seemed like a bustling Ofmerry crowds justling at pitching and hustling,
Small feet were pattering, wooden shoes clattering,
Little hands clapping and little tongues chattering.
And, like fowls in a farmyard whenbarley is scat.
tering,
Out came the children running.
And all the little boys and girls,
153
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
With rosy cheeks and flaxen curls,
And sparkling eyes and teeth like pearls,
Tripping and skipping, ran merrily after
The wonderful music with shouting and laughter.
The Mayor was dumb, and the Council stood As if they were changed into blocks of wood,
Unable to move a step, or cry To the children merrily skipping by,
-Could only follow with the eye
That joyous crowd at the Piper's back.
And now the Mayor was on the rack,
And the wretched Council's bosoms beat,
As the Piper turned from the High Street
To where the Weser rolled its waters
Right in the way of their sons and daughters !
However, he turned from south to west,
And to Koppelberg Hill his steps addressed,
And after him the children pressed;
Great was the joy in every breast.
"Henever can cross that mighty top !
He's forced to let the piping drop,
And we shall see our children stop !"
When, lo, as they reached the mountain-side,
Awondrous portal opened wide,
As if a cavern was suddenly hollowed;
And the Piper advanced, and the children followed,
Andwhen all were in to the very last,
The door in the mountain-side shut fast.
Did I say all? No! One was lame,
Andcould not dance the whole of the way;
And in after years, if you would blame His sadness, he was used to say154
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
"It's dull in our town since my playmates left!
I can't forget that I'm bereft Of all the pleasant sights they see,
Which the Piper also promised me.
For he led us, he said, to a joyous land,
Joining the town and just at hand,
Where waters gushed and fruit trees grew,
And flowers put forth a fairer hue,
Andeverything was strange and new;
The sparrows were brighter than peacocks
here,
And their dogs outran our fallow deer,
Andhoney-bees had lost their stings,
And horses were born with eagles' wings;
And just as I became assured Mylame foot would be speedily cured,
The music stopped, and I stood still,
Andfound myself outside the hill,
Left alone against my will,
To go now limping as before,
And never hear of that country more!"
Alas, alas for Hamelin!
There came into many aburgher's pate A text which says that heaven's gate Opes to the rich at as easy rate As the needle's eye takes a camel in!
The Mayor sent East, West, North and South,
To offer the Piper, by word of mouth,
Wherever it was man's lot to find him,
Silver and gold to his heart's content,
If he'd only return the way he went,
Andbring the children behind him,
155
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN
But when they saw 'twas a lost endeavor,
And Piper and dancers were gone forever,
They made a decree that lawyers never Should think their records dated duly
If, after the day of the month and the year,
These words did not as well appear :
"And so long after what happened here
On the Twenty-second of July,
Thirteen hundred and seventy-six."
And the better in memory to fix
The place of the children's last retreat,
They called it the Pied Piper's StreetWhere any one playing on pipe or tabor Was sure for the future to lose his labor.
Nor suffered they hostelry or tavern To shock with mirth a street so solemn;
But opposite the place of the cavern
They wrote the story on a column,
And on the great church-window painted
The same, to make the world acquainted How their children were stolen away,
And there it stands to this very day.
And I must not omit to say
That in Transylvania there's a tribe
Of alien people who ascribe The outlandish ways and dress On which their neighbors lay such stress,
To their fathers and mothers having risen
Out of some subterraneous prison Into which they were trepanned Long ago in amighty band Out of Hamelin town in Brunswick land,
But how or why, they don't understand.
156
WAITING AROUND
So, Willy, let you and me be wipers Of scores out with all men-especially pipers !
And, whether they pipe us free from rats or from mice,
If we've promised them aught, let us keep our promise!
WAITING AROUND
By Burges Johnson
T was awful long ago That I put those seeds around;
And I guess I ought to know
When I stuck 'em in the ground.
'Cause I noted down the day
In a little diary book- It's gotten losted somewheres, and
I don't know where to look.
But I'm certain anyhow,
They've been planted 'most a week;
And it must be time by now For their little sprouts to peek.
They've been watered every day With a very speshul care,
And once or twice I've dug 'em up, to
See if they was there.
Ifixed the dirt in humps,
Just the way they said I should;
And I crumbled all the lumps
Just as finely as I could.
157
WISHING
And I found an angle-worm A-poking up his headHe maybe feeds on seeds and such,
And so I squashed him dead.
A seed's so very small ;
And dirt all looks the sameHow can they know at all The way they ought to aim?
And so I'm waiting 'round
In case of any need;
Afarmer ought to do his best for
Every single seed!
WISHING
By William Allingham
ING- TING! RING I wish I were a Primrose,
A bright yellow Primrose, blowing in the spring!
The stooping boughs above me,
The wandering bee to love me,
The fern and moss to creep across,
And the Elm-tree for our king!
Nay-stay! I wish I were an Elm-tree,
Agreat, lofty Elm-tree, with green leaves gay!
The winds would set them dancing,
The sun and moonshine glance in,
The birds would house among the boughs,
And sweetly sing.
158
A CHURCHYARD ELEGY
Oh-no! I wish I were a Robin,
ARobin or a little Wren, everywhere to go;
Through forest, field, or garden,
And ask no leave or pardon,
Till winter comes with icy thumbs To ruffle up our wing!
Well-tell! Where should I fly to,
Where go to sleep in the dark wood or dell?
Before a day was over,
Home comes the rover,
For mother's kiss-sweeter this
Than any other thing.
ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY
CHURCHYARD
T
By Thomas Gray
HE curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly o'er the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight Anddrowsy tinklings lull the distant folds:
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower The moping owl does to the moon complain Ofsuch as, wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
159
A CHURCHYARD ELEGY
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade
Whereheavesthe turf inmany amouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude Forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow twittering from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn
Or busy housewife ply her evening care :
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Oft did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow oft the stubborn glebe has broke;
Howjocund did they drive their team afield !
Howbow'd thewoods beneath their sturdystroke !
Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the Poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e'er gave
Awaits alike th' inevitable hour:-
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye Proud, impute to these the fault If Memory o'er their tomb no trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn aisle and fretted
vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise,
160
A CHURCHYARD ELEGY
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can Honor's voice provoke the silent dust
Or Flattery soothe the dull cold ear of Death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire ;
Hands, that the rod of empire might have sway'd,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre :
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time, did ne'er enroll ;
Chill Penury repress'd their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear :
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village- Hampden, that with dauntless breast The little tyrant of his fields withstood,
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood.
Th' applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty o'er a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes
Their lot forbade: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined ;
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind ;
161
A CHURCHYARD ELEGY
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife Their sober wishes never learn'd to stray;
Along the cool sequester'd vale of life They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet e'en these bones from insult to protect Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture
deck'd,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by th' unletter'd Muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
Andmany aholy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being e'er resign'd,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires ;
E'en from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
E'en in our ashes live their wonted fires.
162
AND ALL THE AIR A SOLEMN STILLNESS HOLDS
-page 159
From the original painting by Thomas Fogarty

A CHURCHYARD ELEGY
For thee, who, mindful of th' unhonor'd dead,
Dost in these lines their artless tale relate ;
If chance, by lonely Contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fateHaply some hoary-headed swain may say,
Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn Brushing with hasty steps the dews away,
To meet the sun upon the upland lawn;
There at the foot of yonder nodding beech That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
His listless length at noon-tide would he stretch,
Andpore upon the brook that babbles by.
Hard by yonwood, now smiling as in scorn,
Muttering his wayward fancies he would rove ;
Now drooping, woeful-wan, like one forlorn,
Or crazed with care, or cross'd in hopeless love.
One morn I miss'd him on the custom'd hill,
Along the heath, and near his favorite tree;
Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he;
The next with dirges due in sad array Slow through the church-way path we saw him borneApproach and read (for thou canst read) the
lay Graved on the stone beneath yon agèd thorn.
Jun. Cl-10 163 6
CROCUS
The Epitaph
Here rests his head upon the lap of Earth Ayouth, to Fortune and to Fame unknown;
Fair Science frown'd not on his humble birth
And Melancholy mark'd him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere ;
Heavendid a recompense as largely send:
He gave to Mis'ry all he had, a tear,
He gain'd from Heaven ( 'twas all he wish'd) a
friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose, )
The bosom of his Father and his God.
T
CROCUS
By Sarah J. Day
THE Crocus had slept in his little round house
So soundly the whole winter through;
There came a tap-tapping-'twas spring at the door:
"Up! up ! we are waiting for you!"
The Crocus peeped out from his little brown house
And nodded his gay little head;
"Good-morning, Miss Snowdrop! and how do you
do
This fine, chilly morning?" he said.
164
TO A WATERFOWL
By William Cullen Bryant
WHITHER While glow, the midst heavens fallingwithdewthe last steps
of day,
Far, through their rosy depths, dost thou pursue Thy solitary way?
Vainly the fowler's eye
Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong,
As, darkly painted on the crimson sky,
Thy figure floats along.
Seek'st thou the plashy brink
Of weedy lake, or marge of river wide,
Or where the rocking billows rise and sink
On the chafed ocean side?
There is a Power whose care
Teaches thy way along that pathless coast,
The desert and illimitable airLone wandering, but not lost.
All day thy wings have fanned,
Atthat far height, the cold thin atmosphere,
Yet stoop not, weary, to the welcome land,
Though the dark night is near.
And soon that toil shall end;
Soon shalt thou find a summer home, and rest,
And scream among thy fellows; reeds shall bend,
Soon, o'er thy sheltered nest.
165
THE BROWN THRUSH
Thou'rt gone, the abyss of heaven Hath swallowed up thy form; yet, on my heart
Deeply hath sunk the lesson thou hast given,
And shall not soon depart.
He who, from zone to zone,
Guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight,
In the long way that I must tread alone
Will lead my steps aright.
T
THE BROWN THRUSH
By Lucy Larcom
HERE'S amerry brown thrush sitting up in
the tree-
"He's singing to me! He's singing to me!"
Andwhat does he say, little girl, little boy?
"Oh, the world's running over with joy!
Don't you hear? don't you see?
Hush! Look! In my tree,
I'm as happy as happy can be!"
And the brown thrush keeps singing, "Anest do
you see,
And five eggs hid by mein the juniper-tree?
Don't meddle! don't touch! little girl, little boy,
Or the world will lose some of its joy!
Now I'm glad! now I'm free!
And I always shall be,
If you never bring sorrow to me."
166
THE BLUE JAY
So the merry brown thrush sings away in the tree,
To you and to me, to you and to me;
Andhe sings all the day, little girl, little boy,
"Oh, the world's running over with joy;
But long it won't be,
Don't you know? don't you see?
Unless we are as good as can be?"
Ο
THE BLUE JAY
By Susan Hartley Swett
BLUE JAY up in the maple tree,
Shaking your throat with such bursts of glee,
How did you happen to be so blue?
Did you steal a bit of the lake for your crest,
And fasten blue violets into your vest?
Tell me, I pray you tell me true!
Did you dip your wings in azure dye,
When April began to paint the sky,
That was pale with the winter's stay?
Orwere you hatched from ablue bell bright,
'Neath the warm, gold breast of a sunbeam light,
Bythe river one blue spring day?
O Blue Jay up in the maple tree,
Atossing your saucy head at me,
With ne'er a word for my questioning,
Pray, cease for amoment your "ting-a-link,"
Andhear when I tell you what I thinkYou bonniest bit of the spring.
167
THE BLUEBIRD
I think when the fairies made the flowers,
To grow in these mossy fields of ours,
Periwinkles and violets rare,
There was left of the spring's own color, blue,
Plenty to fashion a flower whose hue
Would be richer than all and as fair.
So, putting their wits together, they Made one great blossom so bright and gay,
The lily beside it seemed blurred;
And then they said, "Wewill toss it in air ;
So many blue blossoms grow everywhere,
Let this pretty one be a bird!"
I
THE BLUEBIRD
By Emily Huntington Miller
KNOW the song that the bluebird is singing,
Out in the apple-tree where he is swinging,
Brave little fellow ! the skies may be drearyNothing cares he while his heart is so cheery.
Hark! how the music leaps out from his throat !
Hark! was there ever so merry a note?
Listen awhile, and you'll hear what he's saying,
Up in the apple-tree swinging and swaying :
"Dear little blossoms down under the snow,
You must be weary of winter, I know;
Hark while I sing you a message of cheer:
Summer is coming! and spring-time is here!
168
THE NIGHTINGALE
"Little white snow-drop! I pray you arise ;
Bright yellow crocus! come, open your eyes ;
Sweet little violets, hid from the cold,
Put on your mantles of purple and gold;
Daffodils ! daffodils! say, do you hear ?-
Summer is coming! and spring-time is here!"
THE NIGHTINGALE AND
GLOW- WORM
A
By William Cowper
NIGHTINGALE, that all day long Had cheered the village with his song,
Nor yet at eve his note suspended,
Nor yet when eventide was ended,
Began to feel as well he mightThe keen demands of appetite ;
When, looking eagerly around,
He spied, far off, upon the ground,
Asomething shining in the dark,
Andknew the glow-wormby his spark;
So, stooping down from hawthorn top,
He thought to put him in his crop.
The worm, aware of his intent,
Harangued him thus, quite eloquent- "Did you admire my lamp," quoth he,
"As much as Iyour minstrelsy,
You would abhor to do me wrong,
As much as I to spoil your song;
For ' twas the self-same Power divine
Taught you to sing, and me to shine;
169
THE LARK AND THE ROOK
That you with music, I with light,
Might beautify and cheer the night. "
The songster heard his short oration,
And, warbling out his approbation,
Released him, as my story tells,
And found a supper somewhere else.
THE LARK AND THE ROOK
Anonymous
I've "GOODNIGHT bathed " Themydaylight wngsfades in theRook ; itsun's willsaid last soonaraylittle ; lark
I've sung my hymn to the parting day;
So now I haste to my quiet nook Inyondewy meadow-good-night, Sir Rook!"
"Good-night, poor Lark," said his titled friend With ahaughty toss and adistant bend;
"I also go to my rest profound,
But not to sleep on the cold, damp ground.
The fittest place for abird like me
Is the topmost bough of yon tall pine tree.
"I opened my eyes at peep of day And saw you taking your upward way,
Dreaming your fond romantic dreams,
An ugly speck in the sun's bright beams;
Soaring too high to be seen or heard;
And I said to myself, 'What afoolish bird!'
170
THE OWL
"I trod the park with a princely air,
I filled my crop with the richest fare;
Icawed all day 'mid alordly crew,
And I made more noise in the world than you!
The sun shone forth on my ebon wing;
I looked and wondered-good-night, poor thing!"
"Good night, once more," said the lark's sweet voice.
"I see no cause to repent my choice ;
You build your nest in the lofty pine,
But is your slumber more sweet than mine?
You make more noise in the world than I,
But whose is the sweeter minstrelsy?"
THE OWL
By Alfred Tennyson
HEN cats run home and light is cold upon the ground,
And the far-off stream is dumb,
And the whirring sail goes round,
And the whirring sail goes round;
Alone and warming his five wits,
The white owl in the belfry sits .
conce,
When merry milkmaids click the latch,
And rarely smells the new-mown hay,
And the cock hath sung beneath the thatch Twice or thrice his roundelay,
Twice or thrice his roundelay ;
Alone and warming his five wits,
The white owl in the belfry sits.
171
M
ROBERT OF LINCOLN
By William Cullen Bryant
ERRILY swinging on brier and weed,
Near to the nest of his little dame,
Over the mountain-side or mead,
Robert of Lincoln is telling his name.
Bob-o' -link, bob-o' -link,
Spink, spank, spink,
Snug and safe is this nest of ours,
Hidden among the summer flowers.
Chee, chee, chee.
Robert of Lincoln is gayly dressed,
Wearing a bright, black wedding-coat ;
White are his shoulders, and white his crest,
Hear him call in his merry note,
Bob-o' -link, bob-o' -link,
Spink, spank, spink,
Look what a nice, new coat is mine;
Sure there was never abird so fine.
Chee, chee, chee.
Robert of Lincoln's Quaker wife,
Pretty and quiet, with plain brown wings,
Passing at home a patient life,
Broods in the grass while her husband sings Bob-o'-link, bob-o' -link,
Spink, spank, spink,
Brood, kind creature, you need not fear Thieves and robbers while I am here.
Chee, chee, chee.
172
ROBERT OF LINCOLN
Modest and shy as a nun is she ;
One weak chirp is her only note ;
Braggart, and prince of braggarts is he,
Pouring boasts from his little throat,
Bob-o' - link, bob-o' -link,
Spink, spank, spink,
Never was I afraid of man,
Catch me, cowardly knaves, if you can.
Chee, chee, chee.
Six white eggs on abed of hay,
Flecked with purple, apretty sight :
There as the mother sits all day,
Robert is singing with all his might,
Bob-o'-link, bob-o' -link,
Spink, spank, spink,
Nice good wife that never goes out,
Keeping house while I frolic about.
Chee, chee, chee.
Soon as the little ones chip the shell,
Six wide mouths are open for food ;
Robert of Lincoln bestirs him well,
Gathering seeds for the hungry brood.
Bob-o' -link, bob-o' -link,
Spink, spank, spink,
This new life is likely to be
Hard for a gay young fellow like me.
Chee, chee, chee.
Robert of Lincoln at length is made
Sober with work, and silent with care,
173
TO THE LADY-BIRD
Off is his holiday garment laid,
Half forgotten that merry air,
Bob-o' -link, bob-o' -link,
Spink, spank, spink,
Nobody knows but my mate and I,
Where our nest and our nestlings lie.
Chee, chee, chee.
Summer wanes; the children are grown;
Fun and frolic no more he knows,
Robert of Lincoln's a hum-drum drone;
Off he flies, and we sing as he goes,
Bob-o' -link, bob-o' - link,
Spink, spank, spink,
Whenyou can pipe that merry old strain,
Robert of Lincoln, come back again.
Chee, chee, chee.
TO THE LADY-BIRD
By Mrs. Southey
LADYThe-BIRD field-mouse !lady-has birdgone ! fly awayherhome nest,:
The daisies have shut up their sleepy red eyes,
And the bees and the birds are at rest.
Lady-bird! lady-bird! fly away home:
The glow-worm is lighting her lamp,
The dew's falling fast, and your fine speckled wings Will flag with the close-clinging damp.
174
GRASSHOPPER AND CRICKET
Lady-bird ! lady-bird ! fly away home- Good luck if you reach it at last !
The owl's come abroad, and the bat's on the roam,
Sharp set from their Ramazan fast.
Lady-bird! lady-bird! fly away homeThe fairy bells tinkle afar !
Make haste, or they'll catch you, and harness you
fast
With a cobweb to Oberon's car.
Lady-bird! lady-bird! fly away homeTo your house in the old willow-tree,
Where your children so dear have invited the ant
And a few cosy neighbors to tea.
Lady-bird! lady-bird! fly away home,
And if not gobbled up by the way,
Nor yoked by the fairies to Oberon's car,
You're in luck-and that's all I've to say.
THE GRASSHOPPER AND CRICКЕТ
G
By Leigh Hunt
REEN little vaulter in the sunny grass,
Catching your heart up at the feel of June Sole voice that's heard amidst the lazy noon
Wheneven the bees lag at the summoning brass ;
And you, warm little housekeeper, who class
With those who think the candles come too soon,
Loving the fire, and with your tricksome tune
Nick the glad silent moments as they pass !
175
ANT AND CRICKET
O sweet and tiny cousins, that belong,
One to the fields, the other to the hearth,
Both have your sunshine; both, though small, are
strong
At your clear hearts ; and both seem given to earth
To sing in thoughtful ears this natural song- In doors and out, summer and winter, mirth.
THE ANT AND THE CRICKET
Anonymous
ASILLY Throughyoung the cricket warm,, accustomed sunny months to singgay
summer and spring,
Began to complain, whenhe found that at home
His cupboard was empty and winter was come.
Not a crumb to be found
On the snow-covered ground;
Not a flower could he see,
Not a leaf on a tree :
"Oh, what will become," says the cricket, "of me? "
At last, by starvation and famine made bold,
All dripping with wet and all trembling with cold,
Awayhe set off to a miserly ant,
To see if, to keep him alive, he would grant Him shelter from rain;
Amouthful of grain
He wished only to borrow,
He'd repay it to-morrow ;
If not, he must die of starvation and sorrow.
176
THE HOUSEKEEPER
Says the ant to the cricket, "I'm your servant and
friend,
But we ants never borrow, we ants never lend;
But tell me, dear sir, did you lay nothing by When the weather was warm?" Said the cricket,
Not I.
My heart is so light
That I sang day and night,
For all nature looked gay"-
"You sang, sir, you say?
Gothen," said the ant, "and dance winter away."
Thus ending, he hastily lifted the wicket And out of the door turned the poor little cricket.
Though this is afable, the moral is good:
If you live without work, you must live without food.
T
THE HOUSEKEEPER
By Charles Lamb
HE frugal snail, with forecast of repose,
Carries his house with him where'er he goes ;
Peeps out-and if there comes a shower of rain,
Retreats to his small domicile again.
Touch but a tip of him, a horn-'tis wellHe curls up inhis sanctuary Shell,
He's his own landlord, his own tenant; stay
Long as he will, he dreads no Quarter Day.
Himself he boards and lodges; both invites And feasts himself; sleeps with himself o' nights
177
GRASSHOPPER AND CRICKET
He spares the upholsterer trouble to procure
Chattels ; himself is his own furniture,
Andhis sole riches. Wheresoe'er he roamKnock whenyou will he's sure to be at home.
T
SONG
By Alfred Tennyson
CHE winds, as at their hour of birth,
Leaning upon the ridged sea,
Breathed low around the rolling earth
With the mellow preludes, "We are free,"
The streams through many a lilied row
Down-carolling to the crisped sea,
Low-tinkled with abell-like flow
Atween the blossoms, "We are free."
THE GRASSHOPPER AND CRICKET
T
By John Keats
HE poetry of earth is never dead;
When all the birds are faint with the hot sun
Andhide in cooling trees, a voice will run
From hedge to hedge about the new-mownmead.
That is the grasshopper's he takes the lead In summer luxury-he has never done
With his delights ; for, when tired out with fun,
He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.
The poetry of earth is ceasing never.
178
THE KITTEN
Onalone winter evening, when the frost
Has wrought asilence, from the stove there shrills The cricket's song, inwarmth increasing ever,
And seems, to one in drowsiness half lost,
The grasshopper's among some grassy hills.
KEEPING STORE
By Mary F. Butts
WEhavebags and bags Ehave bags and bags of whitest down
Out of the milk-weed pods;
Wehave purple asters in lovely heaps,
And stacks of golden-rods.
Wehave needles out of the sweet pine woods,
Andspools of cob-web thread;
Wehavebachelor's buttons for dolly's dress,
Andhollyhock caps for her head.
THE KITTEN, AND FALLING LEAVES
By William Wordsworth
EE the kitten on the wall,that fall,
Withered leaves-one-two-and threeFrom the lofty elder tree!
Through the calm and frosty air
Of this morning bright and fair,
Eddying round and round they sink Softly, slowly: one might think,
179
WHAT THE WIND BRINGS
From the motions that are made,
Every little leaf conveyed Sylph or fairy hither tending- To this lower world descending,
Each invisible and mute,
In his wavering parachute.
But the kitten, how she starts !
Crouches, stretches, paws and darts!
First at one, and then its fellow,
Just as light and just as yellow ;
There are many now-now oneNow they stop and there are none.
What intenseness of desire
In her upward eye of fire!
With a tiger-leap, half-way Now she meets the coming prey;
Lets it go as fast, and then
Has it in her power again:
Now she works with three or four,
Like an Indian conjuror;
Quick as he in feats of art,
Far beyond in joy of heart.
WHAT THE WIND BRINGS
By Edmund Clarence Stedman
is the wind that brings the cold? WHICH The North is the- Wind wind, Freddy, and all the
snow;
And the sheep will scamper into the fold When the North begins to blow.
180
THE WIND
Which is the wind that brings the heat?
The South- Wind, Katy; and corn will grow,
And peaches redden for you to eat,
When the South begins to blow.
Which is the wind that brings the rain?
The East-Wind, Arty; and farmers know The cows come shivering up the lane When the East begins to blow.
Which is the wind that brings the flowers?
The West- Wind, Bessy; and soft and low
The birdies sing in the summer hours,
When the West begins to blow.
I
THE WIND
By Robert Louis Stevenson
SAWyou toss the kites on high Andblow the birds about the sky ;
And all around I heard you pass,
Like ladies' skirts across the grassOwind, a-blowing all day long,
Owind, that sings so loud asong!
I saw the different things you did,
But always you yourself you hid.
I felt you push, I heard you call,
Icould not see yourself at all- Owind, a-blowing all day long,
Owind, that sings so loud asong!
181
WIND-SONG
O you that are so strong and cold,
O blower are you young or old?
Are you a beast of field and tree,
Or just a stronger child than me?
O wind, a-blowing all day long,
Owind, that sings so loud a song!
WHO HAS SEEN THE WIND
W
By Christina G. Rossetti
HO has seen the wind?
Neither I nor you:
But when the leaves hang trembling,
The wind is passing through.
Who has seen the wind?
Neither you nor I:
But when the trees bow down their heads
The wind is passing by.
WIND-SONG
By Nora Hopper
BLOWmerry- , blow, winds blow,braggartwinds and
Blow down the almond snow, toss the flowering
cherry.
Daffodils ablow, arow, mingle intheir dances,
Shake the purple flags that grow tall amid their
lances.
Blow, O winds blow, strip the winter-berry!
182
WINDY NIGHTS
Far and near, push and peer, here's a nest a
growing- Winds merry, winds dear, hush here your blowing!
Trouble not the mother-wren when she comes and
goes,
Dreaming of the wings and songs that her secret knowsSoft here, winds dear, where the nests are showing.
Blow, blow loud and low, wild winds and merry,
Hurtling down upon our heads bring a snow of
cherry.
Bring the yellow kingcups out in the flowerless
places,
Set the naked woods aflush with the wind-flowers'
faces.
Make the old briar run with sap ready for the berry,
Bring the swallows, April follows, wild winds and
merry.
WINDY NIGHTS
By Robert Louis Stevenson
HENEVERthe moon and starsareset,
Whenever the wind is high,
All night long in the dark and wet,
Amangoes riding by.
Late in the night when the fires are out,
Whydoes he gallop and gallop about?
183
THE WIND AND THE MOON
Whenever the trees are crying aloud,
And ships are tossed at sea,
By, on the highway, low and loud,
By at the gallop goes he.
By at the gallop he goes, and then
By he comes back at the gallop again.
THE WIND AND THE MOON
By George MacDonald
AID the Wind to the Moon, "I will blow you out!
You stare
In the air
As if crying 'Beware,'
Always looking what I am about :
I hate to be watched; I will blow you out !
The Wind blew hard, and out went the Moon.
So, deep
On a heap
Of clouds, to sleep,
Down lay the Wind, and slumbered soon,
Muttering low, "I've done for that Moon!"
He turned in his bed: she was there again!
Onhigh
In the sky,
With her one ghost-eye The Moon shone white and alive and plain:
Said the Wind, "I will blow you out again!"
184
THE WIND AND THE MOON
The Wind blew hard, and the Moon grew slim.
"With my sledge
And my wedge
I have knocked off her edge !
Iwill blow," said the Wind, "right fierce and grim,
And the creature will soon be slimmer than slim!"
He blew and he blew, and she thinned to a thread.
"One puff
More's enough
To blow her to snuff !
One good puff more where the last was bred,
Andglimmer, glimmer, glum will go that thread!"
Heblew a great blast, and the thread wasgone.
In the air
Nowhere
Was a moonbeam bare ;
Larger and nearer the shy stars shone :
Sure and certain the Moon was gone!
The Wind he took to his revels once more ;
On down
Andin town,
A merry-mad clown,
He leaped and holloed with whistle and roarWhenthere was that glimmering thread once more!
He flew in a rage-he danced and blew ;
But in vain
Was the pain
Of his bursting brain,
For still the Moon-scrap the broader grew
The more that he swelled his big cheeks andblew.
185
SLEIGH SONG
Slowly she grew-till she filled the night,
And shone
On her throne
In the sky alone,
Amatchless, wonderful, silvery light,
Radiant and lovely, the queen of the night.
Said the Wind: "What a marvel of power am I !
With mybreath,
Ingood faith,
I blew her to death!
First blew her away right out of the sky,
Then blew her in: what a strength am I!"
But the Moon she knew naught of the silly affair;
For, high In the sky,
With her one white eye,
Motionless miles above the air,
She never had heard the great Windblare.
J
SLEIGH SONG
By G. W. Pettee
INGLE, jingle, clear the way,
'Tis the merry, merry sleigh,
As it swiftly scuds along
Hear the burst of happy song,
See the gleam of glances bright,
Flashing o'er the pathway white.
Jingle, jingle, past it flies,
186
COME, LITTLE LEAVES
Sending shafts from hooded eyes,
Roguish archers, I'll be bound,
Little heeding who they wound;
See them, with capricious pranks,
Ploughing now the drifted banks;
Jingle, jingle, mid the glee
Who among them cares for me?
Jingle, jingle, on they go,
Capes and bonnets white with snow,
Not a single robe they fold To protect them from the cold;
Jingle, jingle, mid the storm,
Fun and frolic keep them warm;
Jingle, jingle, down the hills,
O'er the meadows, past the mills,
Now 'tis slow, and now 'tis fast;
Winter will not always last.
Jingle, jingle, clear the way,
'Tis the merry, merry sleigh.
COME, LITTLE LEAVES
"COME,
ByGeorge Cooper
OME, little Leaves," said the Wind one day,
"Come over the meadows with me and play;
Put on your dresses of red and gold,
For summer is gone and the days grow cold."
Soon as the Leaves heard the Wind's loud call,
Down they came fluttering, one and all;
Over the brown fields they danced and flew,
Singing the sweet little song they knew:
187
SEVEN TIMES ONE
"Cricket, good-by, we've been friends so long ;
Little brook, sing us your farewell song;
Say you are sorry to see us go;
Ah, you will miss us, right well we know.
"Dear little lambs in your fleecy fold,
Mother will keep you from harm and cold ;
Fondly we watched you in vale and glade,
Say, will you dream of our loving shade?"
Dancing and whirling, the little Leaves went,
Winter had called them, and they were content ;
Soon, fast asleep in their earthy beds,
The snow laid a coverlid over their heads.
T
SEVEN TIMES ONE
By Jean Ingelow
HERE'S no dew left on the daisies and clover ;
There's no rain left in heaven;
I've said my"seven times" over and over- Seven times one are seven.
I am old! so old I can write a letter ;
My birthday lessons are done:
The lambs play always, they know no better ;
They are only one times one.
OMoon! in the night I have seen you sailing,
And shining so round and low;
You were bright! ah, bright! but your light is failing;
You are nothing now but abow.
188
A PITCHER OF MIGNONETTE
You Moon! have you done something wrong in
heaven,
That God has hidden your face?
I hope if you have, you will soonbe forgiven,
And shine again in your place.
O velvet Bee! you're a dusty fellow,
You've powdered your legs with gold;
O brave marsh Mary-buds, rich and yellow!
Give me your money to hold.
O Columbine! open your folded wrapper Where two twin turtle-doves dwell;
O Cuckoo-pint! toll me the purple clapper,
That hangs in your clear, green bell.
Andshow me your nest with the young ones in it I will not steal them away,
Iam old! you may trust me, Linnet, Linnet- I am seven times one to-day.
A PITCHER OF MIGNONETTE
A
By H. C. Bunner
PITCHER of mignonette,
In a tenement's highest casement:
Queer sort of flower-pot-yet
That pitcher of mignonette Is a garden in heaven set,
To the little sick child inthe basement
The pitcher of mignonette,
In the tenement's highest casement.
189
SIGNS OF RAIN
By Dr. Edward Jenner
Forty Reasons for Not Accepting an Invitation of a Frien to Make an Excursion With Him
1 THE hollow winds begin to blow ;
2 The clouds look black, the glass is low,
3 The soot falls down, the spaniels sleep,
4 And spiders from their cobwebs peep.
5 Last night the sun went pale to bed,
6 The moon in halos hid her head;
7 The boding shepherd heaves a sigh,
8 For see a rainbow spans the sky.
9 The walls are damp, the ditches smell,
10 Closed is the pink-eyed pimpernel.
11 Hark how the chairs and tables crack !
12 Old Betty's nerves are on the rack;
13 Loud quacks the duck, the peacocks cry,
14 The distant hills are seeming nigh.
15 How restless are the snorting swine!
16 The busy flies disturb the kine;
17 Low o'er the grass the swallow wings,
18 The cricket, too, how sharp he sings,
19 Puss on the hearth, with velvet paws,
20 Sits wiping o'er her whiskered jaws,
21 Through the clear streams the fishes rise,
22 And nimbly catch the incautious flies.
23 The glow-worms, numerous and light,
24 Illumed the dewy dell last night,
25 At dusk the squalid toad was seen,
26 Hopping and crawling o'er the green,
27 The whirling dust the wind obeys,
190
A BOY'S SONG
28 And in the rapid eddy plays ;
29 The frog has changed his yellow vest,
30 And in a russet coat is dressed.
31 Though June, the air is cold and still,
32 The mellow blackbird's voice is shrill;
33 My dog, so altered in his taste,
34 Quits mutton-bones on grass to feast",
35 And see yon rooks, how odd their flight.
36 They imitate the gliding kite,
37 And seem precipitate to fall,
38 As if they felt the piercing ball.
39 'Twill surely rain; I see with sorrow,
40 Our jaunt must be put off to-morrow.
A BOY'S SONG
By James Hogg
WHERE Where thethegray poolstrout arebright lies asleep and, deep,
Up the river and o'er the lea,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Where the blackbird sings the latest,
Where the hawthorn blooms the sweetest,
Where the nestlings chirp and flee,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Where the mowers mow the cleanest,
Where the hay lies thick and greenest;
There to trace the homeward bee,
That's the way for Billy and me.
191
FARM- YARD SONG
Where the hazel bank is steepest,
Where the shadow falls the deepest,
Where the clustering nuts fall free,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Why the boys should drive away
Little sweet maidens from the play,
Or love to banter and fight so well,
That's the thing I never could tell.
But this I know, I love to play,
Through the meadow, among the hay;
Up the water and o'er the lea,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Ο
FARM- YARD SONG
By J. T. Trowbridge
VER the hill the farm-boy goes,
His shadow lengthens along the land,
A giant staff in a giant hand ;
In the poplar-tree, above the spring,
The katydid begins to sing ;
The early dews are falling;-
Into the stone-heap darts the mink ;
The swallows skim the river's brink ;
And home to the woodland fly the crows,
When over the hill the farm-boy goes,
Cheerily calling- "Co', boss ! co', boss ! co' ! co' ! co' ! "
192
FARM- YARD SONG
Farther, farther over the hill,
Faintly calling, calling still- " Co' , boss ! co', boss ! co' ! co' ! "
Into the yard the farmer goes,
With grateful heart, at the close of day ;
Harness and chain are hung away ;
In the wagon-shed stand yoke and plow ;
The straw's in the stack, the hay in the mow;
The cooling dews are falling ;-
The friendly sheep his welcome bleat,
The pigs come grunting to his feet,
The whinnying mare her master knows,
When into the yard the farmer goes,
His cattle calling- " Co' , boss ! co' , boss ! co' ! co' ! co' ! "
While still the cow-boy, far away,
Goes seeking those that have gone astray- " Co' , boss ! co' , boss ! co' ! co' ! "
Now to her task the milkmaid goes.
The cattle come crowding through the gate,
Lowing, pushing, little and great ;
About the trough, by the farm-yard pump,
The frolicsome yearlings frisk and jump,
While the pleasant dews are falling ;-
The new-milch heifer is quick and shy,
But the old cow waits with tranquil eye;
And the white stream into the bright pail flows,
When to her task the milkmaid goes,
Soothingly calling- "So, boss ! so, boss ! so ! so ! so ! "
193
THE MILKMAID
The cheerful milkmaid takes her stool,
And sits and milks in the twilight cool,
Saying, " So ! so, boss ! so ! so! "
To supper at last the farmer goes.
The apples are pared, the paper read,
The stories are told, then all to bed.
Without, the crickets' ceaseless song
Makes shrill the silence all night long ;
The heavy dews are falling.
The housewife's hand has turned the lock;
Drowsily ticks the kitchen clock ;
The household sinks to deep repose ;
But still in sleep the farm-boy goes.
Singing, calling- "Co' , boss ! co' , boss ! co' ! co' ! co' ! "
And oft the milkmaid in her dreams,
Drums in the pail with the flashing streams,
Murmuring, "So, boss! so ! "
A
THE MILKMAID
By Jeffreys Taylor
MILKMAID, who poised a full pail on her
head,
Thus mused onher prospects in life, it is said :
" Let me see-I should think that this milk will
procure Onehundred good eggs, or fourscore, to be sure.
"Well then-stop a bit-it must not be forgotten,
Some of these may be broken, and some may be
rotten ;
194
THE MILKMAID
But if twenty for accident should be detached,
It will leave me just sixty sound eggs to be hatched.
"Well, sixty sound eggs-no, sound chickens, I
mean:
Of these some may die-we'll suppose seventeen,
Seventeen! not so many-say ten at the most,
Which will leave fifty chickens to boil or to roast.
"But then there's their barley: how much will they
need?
Why, they take but one grain at atime when they feedSo that's a mere trifle ; now then, let us see,
At a fair market price how much money there'll be.
" Six shillings a pair-five-four-three-and-six,
To prevent all mistakes, that low price I will fix ;
Now what will that make? fifty chickens, I said- Fifty times three-and-sixpence-I'll ask Brother Ned.
"O, but
'em;
stop-three-and-sixpence apair I must sell
Well, a pair is a couple-now then let us tell 'em;
Acouple in fifty will go (mypoorbrain!)
Why, just a score times, and five pair will remain.
"Twenty- five pairs of fowls-now how tiresome
it is
That I can't reckon up so much money as this !
Well, there's no use in trying, so let's give a guess- I'll say twenty pounds, and it can't be no less.
Jun. Cl-10 195 7
HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
"Twenty pounds, I am certain, will buy me a cow,
Thirty geese, and two turkeys-eight pigs and a
Sow;
Nowif these turn out well, at the end of the year,
I shall fill both my pockets with guineas, 'tis clear."
Forgetting her burden, when this she had said,
The maid superciliously tossed up her head;
When, alas for her prospects! her milk-pail de- scended,
And so all her schemes for the future were ended.
This moral, I think, may be safely attached- "Reckon not on your chickens before they are hatched."
HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
By Henry W. Longfellow
Ythe shores of B
Gitche Gumee,
By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
Stood the wigwam of Nokomis,
Daughter of the Moon, Nokomis.
Dark behind it rose the forest,
Rose the black and gloomy pine-trees,
Rose the firs with cones upon them;
Bright before it beat the water,
Beat the clear and sunny water,
Beat the shining Big-Sea-Water.
There the wrinkled old Nokomis
Nursed the little Hiawatha,
Rocked him in his linden cradle,
196
HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
Bedded soft in moss and rushes,
Safely bound with reindeer sinews ;
Stilled his fretful wail by saying,
"Hush! the Naked Bear will hear thee!"
Lulled him into slumber, singing,
"Ewa-yea! my little owlet!
Who is this that lights the wigwam?
Withhis great eyes lights the wigwam?
Ewa-yea! my little owlet!"
Many things Nokomis taught him Of the stars that shine in heaven;
Showed him Ishkoodah, the comet,
Ishkoodah, with fiery tresses ;
Showed the Death-Dance of the spirits,
Warriors with their plumes and war-clubs,
Flaring far away to northward
In the frosty nights of winter;
Showed the broad, white road in heaven,
Pathway of the ghosts, the shadows,
Running straight across the heavens,
Crowded with the ghosts, the shadows.
At the door, on summer evenings,
Sat the little Hiawatha;
Heard the whispering of the pine-trees,
Heard the lapping of the water,
Sounds of music, words of wonder;
"Minnie-wawa!" said the pine-trees,
"Mudway-aushka! " said the water;
Saw the fire-fly, Wah-wah-taysee,
Flitting through the dusk of evening,
With the twinkle of its candle
197
HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
Lighting up the brakes and bushes,
And he sang the song of children,
Sang the song Nokomis taught him:
"Wah-wah-taysee, little fire-fly,
Little, flitting, white-fire insect,
Little, dancing, white-fire creature,
Light me with your little candle,
Ere upon my bed I lay me,
Ere in sleep I close my eyelids !"
Saw the moon rise from the water
Rippling, rounding from the water,
Saw the flecks and shadows on it,
Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis?"
Andthe good Nokomis answered:
"Once a warrior, very angry,
Seized his grandmother, and threw her
Up into the sky at midnight ;
Right against the moon he threw her ;
'Tis her body that you see there."
Saw the rainbow in the heaven,
In the eastern sky, the rainbow,
Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis ?"
And the good Nokomis answered :
" Tis the heaven of flowers you see there ;
All the wild-flowers of the forest,
All the lilies of the prairie,
Whenon earth they fade and perish,
Blossom in that heaven above us."
Whenhe heard the owls at midnight,
Hooting, laughing in the forest,
;
:
198
SEVEN TIMES TWO
"What is that?" he cried in terror ;
"What is that," he said, "Nokomis?"
And the good Nokomis answered:
"That is but the owl and owlet,
Talking in their native language,
Talking, scolding at each other."
Then the little Hiawatha
Learned of every bird its language,
Learned their names and all their secrets,
How they built their nests in summer,
Where they hid themselves in winter,
Talked with them whene'er he met them,
Called them "Hiawatha's Chickens."
Of all beasts he learned the language,
Learned their names and all their secrets,
How the beavers built their lodges,
Where the squirrels hid their acorns,
How the reindeer ran so swiftly,
Why the rabbit was so timid,
Talked with them whene'er he met them,
Called them "Hiawatha's Brothers. "
Y
SEVEN TIMES TWO
ON bells
By Jean Ingelow
in the steeple, ring out your changes,
How many soever they be,
Andlet the brown meadow-lark's note as he ranges
Come over, come over to me.
199
SEVEN TIMES TWO
Yet birds' clearest carol by fall or by swelling No magical sense conveys,
Andbells have forgotten their old art of telling
The fortune of future days.
" Turn again, turn again, " once they rang cheerily While a boy listened alone :
Made his heart yearn again, musing so wearily
All by himself on a stone.
Poor bells ! I forgive you; your good days are over,
Andmine, they are yet to be;
No listening, no longing, shall aught, aught discover:
You leave the story to me.
The foxglove shoots out of the green matted
heather,
Preparing her hoods of snow;
She was idle, and slept till the sunshiny weather:
O, children take long to grow.
I wish, and I wish, that the spring would go
faster,
Nor long summer bide so late ;
AndI could grow on like the foxglove and aster,
For some things are ill to wait.
I wait for the day when dear hearts shall discover,
While dear hands are laid on my head;
"The child is a woman, the book may close only,
For all the lessons are said."
200
THE BAREFOOT BOY
Iwait for my story-the birds cannot sing it,
Not one, as he sits on the tree ;
The bells cannot ring it, but long years, O, bring it !
Such as I wish it to be.
B
THE BAREFOOT BOY
By John Greenleaf Whittier
LESSINGS on thee, little man,
Barefoot boy, with cheek of tan!
With thy upturned pantaloons,
Andthy merry whistled tunes ;
With thy red lip, redder still Kissed by strawberries on the hill;
With the sunshine on thy face,
Through thy torn brim's jaunty grace;
From myheart I give thee joy- Iwas once a barefoot boy!
Prince thou art-the grown-up man Only is republican.
Let the million-dollared ride!
Barefoot, trudging at his side,
Thouhast more than he can buy In the reach of ear and eyeOutward sunshine, inward joy :
Blessings on thee, barefoot boy!
O for boyhood's painless play,
Sleep that wakes in laughing day,
Health that mocks the doctor's rules,
Knowledge never learned of schools:
201
THE BAREFOOT BOY
Of the wild bee's morning chase,
Of the wild flower's time and place,
Flight of fowl and habitude
Of the tenants of the wood;
How the tortoise bears his shell,
How the woodchuck digs his cell,
And the ground-mole sinks his well;
How the robin feeds her young,
How the oriole's nest is hung;
Where the whitest lilies blow,
Where the freshest berries grow,
Where the groundnut trails its vine,
Where the wood-grape's clusters shine;
Of the black wasp's cunning way,
Mason of his walls of clay,
And the architectural plans Of gray hornet artisans !-
For, eschewing books and tasks,
Nature answers all he asks ;
Hand in hand with her he walks,
Face to face with her he talks,
Part and parcel of her joy- Blessings on the barefoot boy!
O for boyhood's time of June,
Crowding years in one brief moon,
When all things I heard or saw,
Me, their master, waited for.
I was rich in flowers and trees,
Humming-birds and honey-bees ;
For my sport the squirrel played,
Plied the snouted mole his spade;
For my taste the blackberry cone
202
THE BAREFOOT BOY
Purpled over hedge and stone ;
Laughed the brook for my delight Through the day and through the night,
Whispering at the garden wall,
Talked with me from fall to fall ;
Mine the sand-rimmed pickerel pond,
Mine the walnut slopes beyond,
Mine, on bending orchard trees,
Apples of Hesperides !
Still, as my horizon grew,
Larger grew my riches, too;
All the world I saw or knew
Seemed a complex Chinese toy,
Fashioned for abarefoot boy!
O for festal dainties spread,
Like my bowl of milk and bread- Pewter spoon and bowl of wood,
On the door-stone, gray and rude!
O'er me like a regal tent,
Cloudy ribbed, the sunset bent,
Purple-curtained, fringed with gold,
Looped in many a wind-swung fold;
While for music came the play
Of the pied frogs' orchestra;
And, to light the noisy choir,
Lit the fly his lamp of fire.
Iwas monarch: pomp and joy Waited on the barefoot boy!
Cheerily, then, my little man,
Live and laugh as boyhood can!
Though the flinty slopes be hard,
203
THANKSGIVING DAY
Stubble-speared the new-mown sward,
Every morn shall lead thee through Fresh baptisms of the dew;
Every evening from thy feet
Shall the cool wind kiss the heat :
All too soon these feet must hide
In the prison cells of pride,
Lose the freedom of the sod,
Like a colt's for work be shod,
Made to tread the mills of toil,
Up and down in ceaseless moil :
Happy if their track be found Never on forbidden ground ;
Happy if they sink not in Quick and treacherous sands of sin,
Ah! that thou couldst know thy joy,
Ere it passes, barefoot boy !
0
THANKSGIVING DAY
By Lydia Maria Child
VER the river and through the wood,
To grandfather's house we go;
The horse knows the way
To carry the sleigh
Through the white and drifted snow,
Over the river and through the wood- Oh, how the wind does blow!
It stings the toes,
And bites the nose,
As over the ground we go.
204
THE SWAN'S NEST
:
Over the river and through the wood,
To have a first-rate play.
Hear the bells ring,
"Ting-a-ling-ding! "
Hurrah for Thanksgiving Day !
Over the river and through the wood Trot fast, mydapple-gray!
Spring over the ground,
Like a hunting-hound!
For this is Thanksgiving Day.
Over the river and through the wood,
And straight through the barnyard gate.
Weseem to go Extremely slowIt is so hard to wait !
Over the river and through the woodNow grandmother's cap I spy !
Hurrah for the fun!
Is the pudding done?
Hurrah for the pumpkin-pie!
THE ROMANCE OF THE SWAN'S
NEST
By Elizabeth Barrett Browning
ITTLE Ellie sits alone EMid the beeches of ameadow,
By a stream-side on the grass,
And the trees are showering down Doubles of their leaves in shadow,
On her shining hair and face.
205
THE SWAN'S NEST
She has thrown her bonnet by,
Andher feet she has been dipping In the shallow water's flow.
Now she holds them nakedly In her hands all sleek and dripping,
While she rocketh to and fro.
Little Ellie sits alone,
And the smile she softly uses Fills the silence like a speech,
While she thinks what shall be done
And the sweetest pleasure chooses
For her future within reach.
Little Ellie in her smile
Chooses *** "I will have a lover,
:
Riding on a steed of steeds !
He shall love me without guile,
And to him I will discover
The swan's nest among the reeds.
"And the steed shall be red-roan,
And the lover shall be noble,
With an eye that takes the breath.
And the lute he plays upon Shall strike ladies into trouble,
As his sword strikes men to death.
"And the steed it shall be shod
All ' in silver, housed in azure,
And the mane shall swim the wind;
And the boofs along the sod
Shall flash onward and keep measure,
Till the shepherds look behind.
206
THE SWAN'S NEST
"But my lover will not prize All the glory that he rides in,
Whenhe gazes in my face.
Hewill say, O Love, thine eyes Build the shrine my soul abides in,
And I kneel here for thy grace.'
"Then, ay then-he shall kneel low,
With the red-roan steed anear him,
Which shall seem to understandTill I answer, 'Rise and go !
For the world must love and fear him
Whom I gift with heart and hand.'
"Then he will arise so pale,
I shall feel my own lips tremble With a yes I must not say ;
Nathless maiden-brave, ' Farewell '
I will utter, and dissemble ;-
' Light to-morrow with to-day.'
"Then he'll ride among the hills
To the wide world past the river,
There to put away all wrong ;
To make straight distorted wills,
And to empty the broad quiver Which the wicked bear along.
" Three times shall a young foot-page Swim the stream and climb the mountain
And kneel down beside my feet ;-
'Lo, my master sends this gage,
Lady, for thy pity's counting !
What wilt thou exchange for it ? '
207
THE SWAN'S NEST
"And the first time, I will send
Awhite rosebud for aguerdon- Andthe second time, aglove ;
But the third time, Imay bend From my pride, and answer, 'Pardon,
If he comes to take my love.'
"Then the young foot-page will run- Then my lover will ride faster,
Till he kneeleth at my knee:
'I am a duke's eldest son!
Thousand serfs do call me master
But, O Love, I love but thee!
"He will kiss me on the mouth
Then, and lead me as a lover
Through the crowds that praise his deeds;
And, when soul-tied by one troth,
Unto him I will discover
That swan's nest among the reeds."
Little Ellie, with her smile
Not yet ended, rose up gayly,
Tied the bonnet, donned the shoe,
And went homeward, round amile,
Just to see, as she did daily,
What more eggs were with the two.
Pushing through the elm-tree copse,
Winding up the stream, light-hearted,
Where the osier pathway leads- Past the boughs she stoops-and stops.
Lo, the wild swan had deserted,
And a rat had gnawed the reeds.
1
1
208
THE VOICE OF SPRING
Ellie went home sad and slow.
If she found the lover ever,
With his red-roan steed of steeds,
Sooth I know not! but I know
She could never show him-never,
That swan's nest among the reeds !
I
THE VOICE OF SPRING
By Mary Howitt
AM coming, I am coming!
Hark! the little bee is humming;
See, the lark is soaring high In the blue and sunny sky;
And the gnats are on the wing,
Wheeling round in airy ring.
See the yellow catkins cover
All the slender willows over !
And on the banks of mossy green Star-like primroses are seen;
And, their clustering leaves below,
White and purple violets blow.
Hark! the new-born lambs are bleating,
Andthe cawing rooks are meeting In the elms a noisy crowd;
All the birds are singing loud ;
And the first white butterfly Inthe sunshine dances by.
209
GREEN THINGS GROWING
Look around thee, look around!
Flowers in all the fields abound:
Every running stream is bright ;
All the orchard trees are white;
And each small and waving shoot Promises sweet flowers and fruit.
Turn thine eyes to earth and heaven:
God for thee the spring has given,
Taught the birds their melodies,
Clothed the earth and cleared the skies
For thy pleasure or thy food;
Pour thy soul in gratitude.
Ο
GREEN THINGS GROWING
By Dinah Maria Mulock
H, the green things growing, the green things growing,
The faint sweet smell of the green things growing!
I should like to live, whether I smile or grieve,
Just to watch the happy life of my green things
growing.
Oh, the fluttering and the pattering of those green things growing!
How they talk each to each, when none of us are
knowing;
In the wonderful white of the weird moonlight
Or the dim dreamy dawn when the cocks are crowing.
210
DAFFODILS
I love, I love them so my green things growing!
And I think that they love me, without false
showing;
For by many a tender touch, they comfort me so
much,
With the soft mute comfort of green things growing.
A BOY'S PRAYER
By H. C. Beeching
MODwho created me G☑ Nimble and light of limb,
In three elements free,
To run, to ride, to swim
Not when the sense is dim,
But now from the heart of joy,
I would remember Him:
Take the thanks of aboy.
I
DAFFODILS
By William Wordsworth
WANDERED lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o'er vales andhills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host, of golden daffodils,
Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
Fluttering anddancing in the breeze.
211
DAFFODIL
Continuous as the stars that shine
And twinkle on the milky way,
They stretched in never-ending line Along the margin of a bay:
Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.
The waves beside them danced; but they Outdid the sparkling waves in glee:
Apoet could not but be gay In such a jocund company.
Igazed, and gazed, but little thought What wealth the show to me had brought.
For oft, when on my couch I lie Invacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inward eye Which is the bliss of solitude;
And thenmyheart with pleasure fills,
Anddances with the daffodils.
DAFFODIL
By Katherine Tynan Hinkson
W
HO passes downthe wintry street?
Hey, ho, daffodil!
Asudden flame of gold and sweet,
With sword of emerald girt to meet.
Andgolden gay from head to feet.
212
JULY
How are you here this wintryday?
Hey, ho, daffodil!
Your radiant fellows yet delay.
No wind flower dances scarlet gay,
Nor crocus flame lights up the way.
What land of cloth o' gold andgreen,
Hey, ho, daffodil!
Cloth o' gold with the green between.
Was that you left but yestere'en,
To light a gloomy world and mean?
King Trumpeter to Flora's queen,
Hey, ho, daffodil!
Blow, and the goldenjousts begin.
W