Once on a time very little rain had fallen in the due season; and the Elephants, being oppressed with thirst, thus addressed their leader: “Master, how are we to live? The small creatures find something to wash in, but we cannot, and we are half dead in consequence; whither shall we go then, and what shall we do?”

Upon that the King of the Elephants led them away a little distance and showed them a beautiful pool of water clear as crystal, where they took their ease.

Now it chanced that a company of Hares resided on the banks of the pool and the going and coming of the Elephants trampled many of them to death, till one of their number grumbled out, “This troop will be coming here to water every day, and every one of our family will be crushed.”

“Do not disquiet yourself,” said an old Buck Hare named Good-speed; “I will manage to stop it,” and so saying, he set off bethinking himself on his way how he should approach and accost a herd of Elephants; for

    Elephants destroy by touching, snakes with point of tooth beguile;     Kings by favor kill, and traitors murder with a fatal smile.

“I will get on the top of a hill,” he thought, “and address the Elephants from there.”

This being done, and the lord of the herd perceiving him, it was asked of the Hare, “Who art thou? and whence comest thou?”

“I am an ambassador from His Godship the Moon,” replied Good-speed.

“State your business,” said the Elephant King.

“Sire,” began the Hare, “an ambassador speaks the truth safely by reason of his position. Thus saith the Moon then: “These Hares were the guardians of my pool, and thine Elephants in coming here have scared them away. This is not well. Am I not “S’às’anka” whose banner bears a hare, and are not these Hares my followers?” “Please your worship,” said the Elephant King with much fear, “we knew nothing of this; we will go there no more.”

“It were well,” said the make-believe ambassador, “that you first make your apologies to the God, who is quaking with rage in his pool, and then went about your business.”

“We will do so,” replied the Elephant with meekness; and being led by night to the pool, in the ripples of which the image of the Moon was quivering, the herd made their prostrations; the Hare explaining to the Moon that their fault was committed in ignorance, and therefore they got their dismissal. 