THEY COME: THE MERRY SUMMER
MONTHS
By William Motherwell
HEY come! the merry summer months of beauty, song, and flowers ;
They come! the gladsome months that bring thick leafiness to bowers.
Up, up, myheart! and walk abroad; fling cark and care aside;
MERRY SUMMER MONTHS
Seek silent hills, or rest thyself where peaceful waters glide ;
Or, underneath the shadow vast of patriarchal
tree,
Scan through its leaves the cloudless sky in rapt tranquillity.
The grass is soft, its velvet touch is grateful to the hand;
And, like the kiss of maiden love, the breeze is
sweet and bland;
The daisy and the buttercup are nodding cour- teously;
It stirs their blood with kindest love, to bless and
welcome thee ;
And mark how with thine own thin locks-they
now are silvery grayThat blissful breeze is wantoning, and whispering,
"Be gay!"
There is no cloud that sails along the ocean of yon
sky
melody;
But hath its own winged mariners to give it
Thou seest their glittering fans outspread, all
gleaming like red gold;
And hark! with shrill pipe musical, their merry course they hold.
Godbless them all, those little ones, who, far above
this earth,
Can make a scoff of its mean joys, and vent a
nobler mirth.
MERRY SUMMER MONTHS
But soft! mine ear upcaught a sound-from yonder
wood it came!
The spirit of the dim green glade did breathe his own glad name;-
Yes, it is he! the hermit bird, that, apart from all
۱ his kind,
Slow spells his beads monotonous to the soft western wind;
void of art ;
Cuckoo! Cuckoo! he sings again-his notes are
But simplest strains do soonest sound the deep
founts of the heart.
Good Lord! it is agracious boon for thought-crazed wight like me,
To smell again these summer flowers beneath this
summer tree!
To suck once more in every breath their little souls
And feed my fancy with fond dreams of youth's away,
bright summer day,
When, rushing forth like untamed colt, the reck- less, truant boy
mighty heart of joy!
Wandered through greenwoods all day long, a
I'm sadder now-I have had cause; but O, I'm
proud to think That each pure joy-fount, loved of yore, I yet delight to drink ; -
Leaf, blossom, blade, hill, valley, stream, the calm,
unclouded sky,
LITTLE DANDELION
Still mingle music with mydreams, as in the days gone by.
When summer's loveliness and light fall round me dark and cold,
I'll bear indeed life's heaviest curse-a heart that
hath waxed old!