IVRY
By Thomas Babington Macaulay
Nowglory OW glory to the Lord of Hosts, from whom all glories are !
Andglory to our Sovereign Liege, King Henry of Navarre!
Now let there be the merry sound of music and of dance,
Through thy corn-fields green, and sunny vines, O
pleasant land of France!
And thou, Rochelle, our own Rochelle, proud city
of the waters,
Again let rapture light the eyes of all thy mourning daughters.
As thou wert constant in our ills, be joyous in our
joy,
For cold, and stiff, and still are they who wrought
thy walls annoy.
Hurrah! Hurrah! a single field hath turned the
chance of war,
Hurrah ! Hurrah! for Ivry, and Henry of Navarre.
IVRY
Oh! how our hearts were beating, when, at the dawn of day,
We saw the army of the League drawn out in long
array ;
With all its priest-led citizens, and all its rebel
peers,
And Appenzell's stout infantry, and Egmont's Flemish spears.
There rode the brood of false Lorraine, the curses
of our land;
Anddark Mayenne was in the midst, atruncheon in his hand;
And, as we looked on them, we thought of Seine's empurpled flood,
Andgood Coligni's hoary hair all dabbled with his blood;
And we cried unto the living God, who rules the fate of war,
To fight for His own holy name, and Henry of Navarre.
The King is come to marshal us, in all his armor
drest,
And he has bound a snow-white plume upon his gallant crest.
He looked upon his people, and atear was in his
eye;
He looked upon the traitors, and his glance was stern and high.
Right graciously he smiled on us, as rolled from wing to wing,
Down all our line, a deafening shout, "God save our Lord the King!"
IVRY
"And if my standard-bearer fall, as fall full well he
may,
For never saw I promise yet of such abloody fray,
Press where ye see mywhite plume shine, amid the ranks of war,
And be your oriflamme to-day the helmet of Navarre."
Hurrah! the foes are moving. Hark to the mingled
din
Of fife, and steed, and trump, and drum, and roar- ing culverin.
The fiery Duke is pricking fast across St. André's plain,
With all the hireling chivalry of Guelders and
Almayne.
Now by the lips of those ye love, fair gentlemen of
France,
Charge for the golden lilies now-upon them with
the lance.
A thousand spurs are striking deep, a thousand spears in rest,
Athousand knights are pressing close behind the snow- white crest ;
And in they burst, and on they rushed, while like a
guiding star,
Amid the thickest carnage blazed the helmet of
Navarre.
Now, God be praised, the day is ours. Mayenne
hath turned his rein.
D'Aumale hath cried for quarter. The Flemish count is slain.
34.9
IVRY
Their ranks are breaking like thin clouds before a
Biscay gale ;
The field is heaped with bleeding steeds, and flags,
and cloven mail.
And then we thought on vengeance, and, all along
our van,
"Remember St. Bartholomew! " was passed from
man to man.
But out spake gentle Henry, "No Frenchman is
my foe:
Down, down with every foreigner, but let your brethren go."
Oh! was there ever such aknight, in friendship or
in war,
As our Sovereign Lord, King Henry, the soldier of Navarre?
Right well fought all the Frenchmen who fought
for France to-day;
Andmany a lordly banner God gave them for a
prey.
But we of the Religion have borne us best in fight;
And the good lord of Rosny has ta'en the cornet
white.
Our own true Maximilian the cornet white hath
ta'en,
The cornet white with crosses black, the flag of
false Lorraine.
Up with it high; unfurl it wide; that all the host may know
How God hath humbled the proud house which wrought His church such woe.
THE HEART OF THE BRUCE
Then on the ground, while trumpets sound their loudest points of war,
Fling the red shreds, a footcloth meet for Henry
of Navarre.
Ho! maidens of Vienna; Ho! matrons of Lucerne;
Weep, weep, and rend your hair for those who never shall return.
Ho! Philip, send, for charity, thy Mexican pistoles,
That Antwerp monks may sing a mass for thy poor spearmen's souls.
Ho! gallant nobles of the League, look that your
Ho! burghers of St. Genevieve, keep watch and
arms be bright ;
ward to-night.
For our God hath crushed the tyrant, our Godhath
raised the slave,
And mocked the counsel of the wise, the valour of
the brave.
Then glory to His holy name, from whom all glories
are;
Andglory to our Sovereign Lord, King Henry of
Navarre.