LOCHINVAR
By Sir Walter Scott
H, young Lochinvar is come out of the West;
Through all the wide Border his steed was the best;
Andsave his good broadswordheweapons hadnone;
He rode all unarmed, and he rode all alone.
So faithful in love, and so dauntless in war,
There never was knight like the young Lochinvar.
He stayed not for brake, and he stopped not for
stone;
He swam the Eske river where ford there was none;
But, ere he alighted at Netherby gate,
The bride had consented, the gallant came late:
For a laggard in love, and adastard in war,
Was to wed the fair Ellen of brave Lochinvar.
LOCHINVAR
So boldly he entered the Netherby hall,
'Mong bridesmen and kinsmen, and brothers and
all.
Then spoke the bride's father, his hand on his sword (For the poor craven bridegroom said never a
word) ,
"Oh, come ye in peace here, or come ye in war,
Or to dance at our bridal, young Lord Lochinvar?"
"I long wooed your daughter, my suit you denied.
Love swells like the Solway, but ebbs like its tide;
Andnow I am come, with this lost love of mine To lead but one measure, drink one cup of wine.
There are maidens in Scotland more lovely by far That would gladly be bride to the young Lochin- var."
The bride kissed the goblet; the knight took it up :
He quaffed off the wine, and he threwdownthecup.
She looked down to blush, and shelooked up to sigh,
With a smile on her lips and a tear in her eye.
He took her soft hand ere her mother could bar-
"Now tread we a measure!" said young Lochinvar.
So stately his form, and so lovely her face,
That never ahall such agalliard did grace;
While her mother did fret, and her father did fume,
And the bridegroom stood dangling his bonnet and plume;
And the bride-maidens whispered, " Twere better by far To have natched our fair cousin with young Lochinvar."
THE SKELETON IN ARMOR
One touch to her hand, and one word in her ear,
When they reached the hall door and the charger
stood near;
So light to the croupe the fair lady he swung,
So light to the saddle before her he sprung!
"She is won! we are gone, over bank, bush, and scaur!
They'll have fleet steeds that follow!" quoth young Lochinvar.
There was mounting 'mong Græmes of the Neth- erby clan;
Forsters, Fenwicks, and Musgraves, they rode and they ran;
There was racing and chasing on Cannobie Lee ;
But the lost bride of Netherby ne'er did they
see.
So daring in love, and so dauntless in war,
Haveye e'er heard of gallantlikeyoungLochinvar?