THE BELLS
By Edgar Allan Poe
EAR the sledges with the bellsSilver bells !
What a world of merriment their melody foretells!
How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,
In the icy air of night!
While the stars that oversprinkle All the heavens seem to twinkle
With a crystalline delight ;
Keeping time, time, time,
In a sort of Runic rhyme,
To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells From the bells, bells, bells, bells,
Bells, bells, bellsFrom the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.
Hear the mellow wedding bells,
Golden bells !
What aworld of happiness their harmony foretells !
Through the balmy air of night How they ring out their delight !
From the molten-golden notes,
And all in tune,
What a liquid ditty floats
To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats On the moon!
Oh, from out the sounding cells,
What agush of euphony voluminously wells !
How it swells !
How it dwells
THE BELLS
On the future! how it tells
Of the rapture that impels To the swinging and the ringing Of the bells, bells, bells,
Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
Bells, bells, bellsTo the rhyming and the chiming of the bells !
Hear the loud alarum bellsBrazen bells !
What a tale of terror, now, their turbulency tells!
In the startled ear of night
How they scream out their affright !
Too much horrified to speak,
They can only shriek, shriek,
Out of tune,
Inthe clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,
In amad expostulation with the deaf and frantic
fire,
Leaping higher, higher, higher,
With a desperate desire,
And a resolute endeavor
Now-now to sit or never,
By the side of the pale-faced moon.
Oh, the bells, bells, bells !
What a tale their terror tells
Of despair!
How they clang, and clash, and roar!
What a horror they outpour On the bosom of the palpitating air !
Yet the ear it fully knows,
By the twanging,
And the clanging,
THE BELLS
How the danger ebbs and flows ;
Yet the ear distinctly tells,
In the jangling And the wrangling,
How the danger sinks and swells,
By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bellsOf the bellsOf the bells, bells, bells, bells,
Bells, bells, bellsIn the clamor and the clangor of the bells.
Hear the tolling of the bells- Iron bells !
What a world of solemn thought their monody
compels !
In the silence of the night,
How we shiver with affright At the melancholy menace of their tone !
For every sound that floats From the rust within their throats
Is a groan.
And the people-ah, the people- They that dwell up in the steeple,
All alone,
And who tolling, tolling, tolling,
In that muffled monotone,
Feel a glory in so rolling On the human heart a stoneThey are neither man nor woman- They are neither brute nor human- They are Ghouls :
THE BELLS
And their king it is that tolls ;
And he rolls, rolls, rolls,
Rolls
Apæan from the bells !
And his merry bosom swells With the pæan of the bells !
And he dances and he yells ;
Keeping time, time, time In a sort of Runic rhyme,
To the pean of the bells- Of the bells :
Keeping time, time, time In a sort of Runic rhyme,
To the throbbing of the bells,
Of the bells, bells, bellsTo the sobbing of the bells,
Keeping time, time, time,
As he knells, knells, knells,
In ahappy Runic rhyme,
To the rolling of the bells- Of the bells, bells, bellsTo the tolling of the bells,
Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
Bells, bells, bellsTo the moaning and the groaning of the bells.