AMERICA
that cause for which they gave the last full measure
of devotion ; that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation,
under God, shall have a new birth of freedom-and
that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.


AMERICA
By S. F. Smith
Ycountry, 'tis of thee,
Of thee I sing ;
Land where my fathers died,
Land of the Pilgrims' pride;
From every mountain side,
Let Freedom ring.
My native country, thee- Land of the noble freeThy name I love ;
I love thy rocks and rills ,
Thy woods and templed hills ;
My heart with rapture thrills,
Like that above.
Let music swell the breeze,
And ring from all the trees
Sweet Freedom's song;
Let mortal tongues awake,
Let all that breathe partake,
Let rocks their silence breakThe sound prolong.

STAR- SPANGLED BANNER
Our fathers' God, to Thee,
Author of liberty,
To Thee we sing ;
Long may our land be bright With Freedom's holy light;
Protect us by Thy might,
Great God, our King.
THE STAR- SPANGLED BANNER
By Francis Scott Key
SAY, can you see, by the dawn's early light,
What so proudly we hailed at the twilight's
last gleaming?
Whose broad stripes and bright stars, through the
perilous fight,
O'er the ramparts we watched, were so gallantly streaming!
And the rockets' red glare, the bombs bursting in
air,
Gave proof through the night that our flag was
still there :
O say, does that star-spangled banner yet wave O'er the land of the free and the home of thebrave?
On the shore dimly seen through the mists of the
deep,
Where the foe's haughty host in dread silence
reposes,
What is that which the breeze, o'er the towering
steep,
As it fitfully blows, now conceals, now discloses ?

STAR- SPANGLED BANNER
Now it catches the gleam of the morning's first
beam,
In full glory reflected now shines on the stream:
'Tis the star-spangled banner! O long may it wave O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!
And where is that band who so vauntingly swore That the havoc of war and the battle's confusion
Ahome and a country should leave us no more?
Their blood has washed out their foul footsteps'
pollution.
No refuge could save the hireling and slave From the terror of flight, or the gloom of the grave:
And the star-spangled banner in triumph doth wave O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!
Oh! thus be it ever, when freemen shall stand
Between their loved homes and the war's
desolation!
Blest with victory and peace, may the Heaven- rescued land
Praise the Power that hath made and preserved us a nation.
Then conquer we must, for our cause it is just,
And this be our motto: "In God is our trust."
And the star-spangled banner in triumph shall
wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the
brave.
