CONCORD HYMN
Ah! then and there was hurrying to and fro,
And gathering tears, and tremblings of distress And cheeks all pale, which, but an hour ago,
Blushed at the praise of their own loveliness ;
And there were sudden partings, such as press The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
Which ne'er might be repeated: who could guess
If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
Since upon night so sweet such awful morn
could rise?
And there was mounting inhot haste: the steed,
The mustering squadron, and the clattering
car
Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
Andswiftly forming in the ranks of war;
And the deep thunder peal on peal afar;
Andnear, the beat of the alarming drum
Roused up the soldier ere the morning star ;
While thronged the citizens with terror dumb,
Or whispering with white lips, "The foe! They come! They come!"


BYCONCORD HYMN
By R. W. Emerson
Ythe rude bridge that arched the flood,
Their flag to April's breeze unfurled,
Here once the embattled farmers stood
Andfired the shot heard round the world.

О САРТAIN! MY CAPTAIN
The foe long since in silence slept ;
Alike the conqueror silent sleeps ;
And Time the ruined bridge has swept
Down the dark stream which seaward creeps.
On this green bank, by this soft stream,
We set to-day a votive stone;
That memory may their deed redeem,
When, like our sires, our sons are gone.
Spirit, that made those heroes dare
To die, and leave their children free,
Bid Time and Nature gently spare The shaft we raise to them and thee.
О САРТAIN! MY CAPTAIN!
By Walt Whitman
CAPTAIN! my Captain! our fearful trip is
The ship has weathered every rack, the prize we
sought is won,
The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,
While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim
and daring;
But O heart ! heart ! heart !
Othe bleeding drops of red,
Where on the deck my Captain lies.
Fallen cold and dead.

A NATION'S STRENGTH
OCaptain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells ;
Rise up for you the flag is flung-for you the bugle trills,
For you bouquets and ribboned wreaths for you the shores a-crowding,
For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager
faces turning;
Here Captain! dear father!
This arm beneath your head!
It is some dream that on the deck
You've fallen cold and dead.
My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,
My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,
The ship is anchored safe and sound, its voyage
closed and done,
From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with
object won;
Exult O shores, and ring O bells !
But I, with mournful tread,
Walk the deck my Captain lies,
Fallen cold and dead.
A NATION'S STRENGTH
