ITALIAN NATIONAL HYMN
LL forward! All forward!
AAll forward to battle! the trumpets are crying,
All forward! All forward! our old flag is flying,
When Liberty calls us we linger no longer ;
Rebels, come on! tho' a thousand to one!
Liberty! Liberty! deathless and glorious,
Under thy banner thy sons are victorious,
Free souls are valiant, and strong arms are
stronger,
Godshall go with us, and battle be won.
Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for the banner!
Hurrah for our banner, the flag of the free.
All forward! All forward!
All forward for Freedom! In terrible splendor She comes to the loyal who die to defend her ;
Her stars and stripes o'er the wild wave of battle Shall float in the heavens to welcome us on.
All forward! to glory, thro' life-blood is pouring,
Where bright swords are flashing, and cannons are
roaring,
Welcome to death in the bullet's quick rattle,
Fighting or falling shall freedom be won.
Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for the banner !
Hurrah for our banner, the flag of the free.
All forward! All forward!
All forward to conquer! Where free hearts are beating,
Death to the cowardwho dreams of retreating!


DANISH NATIONAL HYMN
Liberty calls us from mountain and valley;
Waving her banner she leads to the fight.
Forward! all forward! the trumpets are crying ;
The drum beats to arms, our old flag is flying ;
Stout hearts and strong hands around it shall rally,
Forward to battle, for God and the Right.
Hurrah for the banner! Hurrah for the banner!
Hurrah for our banner, the flag of the free.


DANISH NATIONAL HYMNK
ING Christian stood by lofty mast,
In mist and smoke.
His sword was hammering so fast,
Thro' Gothic helm and brain it pass'd,
Then sank each hostile hulk and mast,
In mist and smoke.
"Fly," shouted they; "fly he who can!
Who braves of Denmark's Christian,
Who braves of Denmark's Christian the
stroke."
Nils Juel gave heed to th' tempest's roar,
Now is the hour!
He hoisted his blood-red flag once more,
And smote upon the foe full sore,
Andshouted loud thro' the tempest's roar,
"Now is the hour."
"Fly!" shouted they, "for shelter fly !
Of Denmark's Juel who can defy,
Of Denmark's Juel who can defy the power?"


SPANISH NATIONAL HYMN
North Sea! aglimpse of Wessel rent
Thy murky sky !
Then champions to thine arms were sent;
Terror and Death glared where he went;
From the waves was heard a wail, that rent
Thy murky sky !
From Denmark thunders Tordenskiol!
Let each to Heav'n commend his soul,
Let each to Heav'n commend his soul andfly.
Path of the Dane to fame and might!
Dark rolling wave!
Receive thy friend, who scorning flight,
Goes to meet danger with despite,
Proudly as thou the tempest's might,
Dark rolling wave!
'Mid mingled pleasures and alarms,
Andwar and vict'ry be thine arms,
'Midwar and vict'ry, be thine arms mygrave.
