SIGNS OF RAIN
By Dr. Edward Jenner
Forty Reasons for Not Accepting an Invitation of a Frien to Make an Excursion With Him
1 THE hollow winds begin to blow ;
2 The clouds look black, the glass is low,
3 The soot falls down, the spaniels sleep,
4 And spiders from their cobwebs peep.
5 Last night the sun went pale to bed,
6 The moon in halos hid her head;
7 The boding shepherd heaves a sigh,
8 For see a rainbow spans the sky.
9 The walls are damp, the ditches smell,
10 Closed is the pink-eyed pimpernel.
11 Hark how the chairs and tables crack !
12 Old Betty's nerves are on the rack;
13 Loud quacks the duck, the peacocks cry,
14 The distant hills are seeming nigh.
15 How restless are the snorting swine!
16 The busy flies disturb the kine;
17 Low o'er the grass the swallow wings,
18 The cricket, too, how sharp he sings,
19 Puss on the hearth, with velvet paws,
20 Sits wiping o'er her whiskered jaws,
21 Through the clear streams the fishes rise,
22 And nimbly catch the incautious flies.
23 The glow-worms, numerous and light,
24 Illumed the dewy dell last night,
25 At dusk the squalid toad was seen,
26 Hopping and crawling o'er the green,
27 The whirling dust the wind obeys,

A BOY'S SONG
28 And in the rapid eddy plays ;
29 The frog has changed his yellow vest,
30 And in a russet coat is dressed.
31 Though June, the air is cold and still,
32 The mellow blackbird's voice is shrill;
33 My dog, so altered in his taste,
34 Quits mutton-bones on grass to feast",
35 And see yon rooks, how odd their flight.
36 They imitate the gliding kite,
37 And seem precipitate to fall,
38 As if they felt the piercing ball.
39 'Twill surely rain; I see with sorrow,
40 Our jaunt must be put off to-morrow.
A BOY'S SONG
By James Hogg
WHERE Where thethegray poolstrout arebright lies asleep and, deep,
Up the river and o'er the lea,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Where the blackbird sings the latest,
Where the hawthorn blooms the sweetest,
Where the nestlings chirp and flee,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Where the mowers mow the cleanest,
Where the hay lies thick and greenest;
There to trace the homeward bee,
That's the way for Billy and me.

FARM- YARD SONG
Where the hazel bank is steepest,
Where the shadow falls the deepest,
Where the clustering nuts fall free,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Why the boys should drive away
Little sweet maidens from the play,
Or love to banter and fight so well,
That's the thing I never could tell.
But this I know, I love to play,
Through the meadow, among the hay;
Up the water and o'er the lea,
That's the way for Billy and me.
Ο
FARM- YARD SONG
By J. T. Trowbridge
VER the hill the farm-boy goes,
His shadow lengthens along the land,
A giant staff in a giant hand ;
In the poplar-tree, above the spring,
The katydid begins to sing ;
The early dews are falling;-
Into the stone-heap darts the mink ;
The swallows skim the river's brink ;
And home to the woodland fly the crows,
When over the hill the farm-boy goes,
Cheerily calling- "Co', boss ! co', boss ! co' ! co' ! co' ! "

FARM- YARD SONG
Farther, farther over the hill,
Faintly calling, calling still- " Co' , boss ! co', boss ! co' ! co' ! "
Into the yard the farmer goes,
With grateful heart, at the close of day ;
Harness and chain are hung away ;
In the wagon-shed stand yoke and plow ;
The straw's in the stack, the hay in the mow;
The cooling dews are falling ;-
The friendly sheep his welcome bleat,
The pigs come grunting to his feet,
The whinnying mare her master knows,
When into the yard the farmer goes,
His cattle calling- " Co' , boss ! co' , boss ! co' ! co' ! co' ! "
While still the cow-boy, far away,
Goes seeking those that have gone astray- " Co' , boss ! co' , boss ! co' ! co' ! "
Now to her task the milkmaid goes.
The cattle come crowding through the gate,
Lowing, pushing, little and great ;
About the trough, by the farm-yard pump,
The frolicsome yearlings frisk and jump,
While the pleasant dews are falling ;-
The new-milch heifer is quick and shy,
But the old cow waits with tranquil eye;
And the white stream into the bright pail flows,
When to her task the milkmaid goes,
Soothingly calling- "So, boss ! so, boss ! so ! so ! so ! "
