SMALL BEGINNINGSA
Andbackward flew to her billowy breast,
Like abird that seeketh her mother's nestAnd amother she was and is to me,
For I was born on the open sea.
The waves were white, and red the morn,
In the noisy hour when I was born;
The whale it whistled, the porpoise rolled,
Andthe dolphins bared their backs of gold;
And never was heard such an outcry wild,
As welcomed to life the ocean child.
Ihave lived since then, in calm and strife,
Full fifty summers a rover's life,
Withwealth to spend, and a power to range,
But never have sought or sighed for change:
Anddeath, whenever he comes to me,
Shall come on the wide, unbounded sea!


SMALL BEGINNINGS
By Charles Mackay
TRAVELLER through a dusty road strewed
acorns on the lea ;
And one took root and sprouted up, and grew
into a tree.
Love sought its shade, at evening time, to breathe its early vows ;
And age was pleased, in heats of noon, to bask beneath its boughs ;
The dormouse loved its dangling twigs, the birds sweet music bore;
It stood a glory in its place, a blessing evermore.


SMALL BEGININNGS
Alittle spring had lost its way amid the grass and fern,
Apassing stranger scooped a well, where weary men might turn;
He walled it in, and hung with care a ladle at the
brink;
He thought not of the deed he did, but judged that toil might drink.
He passed again, and lo! the well, by summers never dried,
Had cooled ten thousand parching tongues, and saved a life beside.
Adreamer dropped a random thought; 'twas old,
and yet 'twas new;
Ásimple fancy of the brain, but strong in being
true.
It shone upon a genial mind, and lo! its light became
Alamp of life, abeacon ray, amonitory flame.
The thought was small; its issue great; a watch-fire on the hill ;
It sheds its radiance far adown, and cheers the
valley still!
Anameless man, amid acrowd that thronged the daily mart,
Let fall a word of Hope and Love, unstudied from the heart;
A whisper on the tumult thrown-a transitory
breathIt raised a brother from the dust; it saved a soul
from death.
Jun, Cl-10 259
