THE ANCIENT MARINER
But with its sound it shook the sails,
That were so thin and sere.
The upper air burst into life !
And ahundred fire-flags sheen,
To and fro they were hurried about!
And to and fro, and in and out,
The wan stars danced between.
And the coming wind did roar more loud,
And the sails did sigh like sedge;
And the rain poured down from one black
cloud;
The Moon was at its edge.
The thick black cloud was cleft, and still The Moon was at its side:
Like waters shot from some high crag,
The lightning fell with never a jag,
Ariver steep and wide.
The loud wind never reached the ship,
Yet now the ship moved on!
Beneath the lightning and the Moon The dead men gave a groan.
They groaned, they stirred, they all uprose,
Nor spake, nor moved their eyes ;
It had been strange, even in a dream,
To have seen those dead men rise.
The helmsman steered, the ship moved on;
Yet never a breeze up blew;


THE ANCIENT MARINER
The mariners all 'gan work the ropes,
Where they were wont to do;
They raised their limbs like lifeless tools- Wewere a ghastly crew.
The body of my brother's son Stood by me, knee to knee:
The body and I pulled at one rope But he said nought to me.
"I fear thee, ancient Mariner! "
Be calm, thou Wedding-Guest !
'Twas not those souls that fled in pain,
Which to their corses came again,
But a troop of spirits blest :
Forwhen it dawned-they dropped their arms And clustered round the mast;
Sweet sounds rose slowlythrough theirmouths And from their bodies passed.
Around, around, flew each sweet sound,
Then darted to the Sun;
Slowly the sounds came back again,
Now mixed, now one by one.
Sometimes a-dropping from the sky Iheard the sky-lark sing;
Sometimes all little birds that are,
How they seemed to fill the sea and air With their sweet jargoning!
And now 'twas like all instruments,
Now like a lonely flute;


THE ANCIENT MARINER
And now it is an angel's song,
That makes the heavens be mute.
It ceased; yet still the sails made on
Apleasant noise till noon,
Anoise like of a hidden brook
In the leafy month of June,
That to the sleeping woods all night
Singeth a quiet tune.
Till noon we quietly sailed on,
Yet never a breeze did breathe :
Slowly and smoothly went the ship,
Moved onward from beneath.
Under the keel nine fathom deep,
From the land of mist and snow,
The spirit slid: and it was he
That made the ship to go.
The sails at noon left off their tune,
And the ship stood still also.
The Sun, right up above the mast,
Had fixed her to the ocean:
But in a minute she 'gan stir,
With a short uneasy motionBackwards and forwards half her length With a short uneasy motion.
Then like a pawing horse let go,
She made a sudden bound:
It flung the blood into my head,
And I fell down in aswound.


THE ANCIENT MARINER
How long in that same fit I lay,
I have not to declare;
But ere my living life returned,
I heard and in my soul discerned Two voices in the air.
"Is it he?" quoth one, "Is this the man?
Byhim who died on cross,
With his cruel bow he laid full low
The harmless Albatross.
"The spirit who bideth by himself In the land of mist and snow,
Heloved the bird that loved the man
Who shot him with his bow."
The other was a softer voice,
As soft as honey-dew:
Quothhe, "The manhath penancedone,
Andpenance more will do."
