THE WIND IN A FROLIC
Oh, de white ban' play hits music, an' hit's mighty good to hyeah,
An' it sometimes leaves a ticklin' in yo' feet ;
But de hea't goes into business Fu' to help erlong de eah,
W'en de colo'd ban' goes marchin' down de street.


THE WIND IN A FROLIC
By William Howitt
Tinderingsprangu
HE wind one morning sprang up from sleep,
a leap!
Now for a madcap galloping chase!
I'll make a commotion in every place!"
So it swept with a bustle right through a great
town,
Cracking the signs and scattering down Shutters ; and whisking, with merciless squalls,
Old women's bonnets and gingerbread stalls.
There never was heard a lustier shout,
As the apples and oranges trundled about ;
And the urchins that stand with their thievish eyes For ever on watch, ran off each with a prize.
Then away to the field it went, blustering and humming,
Andthe cattle all wondered whatever was coming;
It plucked by the tails the grave matronly cows,
And tossed the colts' manes all over their brows ;
Till, offended at such an unusual salute,
They all turned their backs, and stood sulky and
mute.


THE WIND IN A FROLIC
So on it went capering and playing its pranks,
Whistling with reeds on the broad river's banks,
Puffing the birds as they sat on the spray,
Or the traveller grave on the king's highway.
It was not too nice to hustle the bags
Of the beggar, and flutter his dirty rags ;
'Twas so bold that it feared not to play its joke With the doctor's wig or the gentleman's cloak.
Through the forest it roared, and cried gaily, "Now,
You sturdy old oaks, I'll make you bow!"
And it made them bow without more ado,
Or it cracked their great branches through and through.
Then it rushed like a monster oncottage and farm,
Striking their dwellers with sudden alarm;
And they ran out like bees in a midsummer
swarm;-
There were dames with their kerchiefs tied over
their caps,
To see if their poultry were free from mishaps ;
Theturkeys theygobbled, the geese screamed aloud,
And the hens crept to roost in a terrified crowd;
There was rearing of ladders, and logs laying on,
Where the thatch from the roof threatened soon to
be gone.
But the wind had swept on, and had met in a lane
Withaschoolboy, who panted and struggled invain;
For it tossed him and twirled him, then passed, and
he stood
With his hat in a pool and his shoes in the mud.
