THE ANCIENT MARINER
And listens like a three years' child :
The Mariner hath his will.
The Wedding-Guest sat on a stone :
He cannot choose but hear ;
And thus spake on that ancient man,
The bright-eyed Mariner.
" The ship was cheered, the harbor cleared,
Merrily did we drop Below the kirk, below the hill,
Below the lighthouse top.
"The sun came up upon the left,
Out of the sea came he !
And he shone bright, and on the right Went down into the sea.
"Higher and higher every day Till over the mast at noonThe Wedding-Guest here beat his breast,
For he heard the loud bassoon.
The bride hath paced into the hall,
Red as a rose is she ;
Nodding their heads before her goes The merry minstrelsy.
The Wedding-Guest he beat his breast,
Yet he cannot choose but hear ;
And thus spake on that ancient man,
The bright-eyed Mariner.
"And now the Storm-blast came, and he
Was tyrannous and strong:


THE ANCIENT MARINER
He struck with his o'ertaking wings,
And chased us south along.
"With sloping masts and dipping prow,
As who pursued with yell and blow
Still treads the shadow of his foe,
And forward bends his head,
The ship drove fast, loud roared the blast,
And southward aye we fled.
"And now there came both mist and snow,
And it grew wondrous cold :
And ice, mast-high, came floating by,
As green as emerald.
"And through the drifts the snowy clifts Did send a dismal sheen :
Nor shapes of men nor beasts we ken- The ice was all between.
"The ice was here, the ice was there,
The ice was all around :
It cracked and growled, and roared and howled,
Like noises in a swound !
"At length did cross an Albatross,
Thorough the fog it came ;
As if it had been a Christian soul,
We hailed it in God's name.
"It ate the food it ne'er had eat,
And round and round it flew.


THE ANCIENT MARINER
The ice did split with a thunder-fit ;
The helmsman steered us through!
"And agood south wind sprung up bebind ,
The Albatross did follow,
And every day, for food or play,
Came to the mariners' hollo!
"In mist or cloud, on mast or shroud,
It perched for vespers nine ;
Whiles all the night, through fog-smoke white Glimmered the white moon-shine."
"God save thee, ancient Mariner !
From the fiends, that plague thee thus !
Why look'st thou so?"-With mycross-bow I shot the Albatross.
