THE RAGGEDY MAN
And comes back with porridge-crumbs all round his mouth,
Andhe brushes them off with a Japanese fan,
Whing!
Whann!
What a marvellous man!
What a very remarkably marvellous man!
"And The Manin the Moon," sighed The Raggedy Man,
"Gits!
So!
Sullonesome, you know- Up there by hisse'f sence creation began!
That when I call on him and then come away,
Hegrabs me and holds me and begs me to stay- Till-Well! if it wasn't fer Jimmy-cum-jim,
Dadd!
Limb!
I'd go pardners with him- Jes jump my job here and be pardners with him!"
Ο


THE RAGGEDY MAN
By James Whitcomb Riley
THE Raggedy Man! He works fer Pa;
An' he's the goodest man ever you saw!
He comes to our house every day,
An' waters the horses, an' feeds ' em hay;
An' he opens the shed-an' we all ist laugh When he drives out our little old wobble-ly calf;


THE RAGGEDY MAN
An' nen-ef our hired girl says he canHe milks the cow fer 'Lizabuth Ann.-
Ain't he a' awful kind Raggedy Man?
Raggedy ! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
W'y, The Raggedy Man-he's ist so good
He splits the kindlin' an' chops the wood;
An' nen he spades in our garden, too,
An' does most things 'at boys can't do.-
He clumbed clean up in our big treeAn' shooked a' apple down fer meAn' nother'n too, fer 'Lizabuth AnnAn' nother'n, too, fer The Raggedy Man.-
Ain't he a' awful kind Raggedy Man?
Raggedy! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
An' The Raggedy Man, he knows most rhymes An' tells ' em ef I be good, sometimes :
Knows 'bout Giunts, an' Griffuns, an' Elves,
An' the Squidgicum-Squees ' at swallers therselves !
An', wite by the pump in our pasture-lot,
He showed me the hole ' at the Wunks is got,
'At lives 'way deep in the ground, an' can Turn into me, er 'Lizabuth Ann!
Ain't he a funny old Raggedy Man?
Raggedy ! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
The Raggedy Man-one time when he Was makin' a little bow-'n- 'orry fer me,
Says, "When you're big like your Pa is,
Air you go' to keep a fine store like his- An' be a rich merchunt-an' wear fine clothes ?-
Er what air you go' to be, goodness knows ! "

144
THE DINKEY- BIRD
An' nen he laughed at 'Lizabuth Ann,
An' I says, " 'M go' to be a Raggedy Man!
I'm ist go' to be a nice Raggedy Man!"
Raggedy ! Raggedy! Raggedy Man!
