THE ANCIENT MARINER
" If he may know which way to go ;
For she guides him smooth or grim.
See, brother, see ! how graciously She looketh down on him."
First Voice
"But why drives on that ship so fast,
Without or wave or wind ? "
Second Voice
"The air is cut away before,
And closes from behind.
" Fly, brother, fly ! more high, more high !
Or we shall be belated :
For slow and slow that ship will go,
When the Mariner's trance is abated. "
I woke, and we were sailing on
As in a gentle weather :
'Twas night, calm night, the moon was high,
The dead men stood together.
All stood together on the deck,
For a charnel-dungeon fitter :
All fixed on me their stony eyes,
That in the Moon did glitter.
The pang, the curse, with which they died,
Had never passed away :
I could not draw my eyes from theirs,
Nor turn them up to pray.


THE ANCIENT MARINER
And now this spell was snapt : once more I viewed the ocean green,
And looked far forth, yet little saw Of what had else been seenLike one, that on a lonesome road
Doth walk in fear and dread,
And having once turned round walks on,
And turns no more his head;
Because he knows, a frightful fiend
Doth close behind him tread.
But soon there breathed a wind on me,
Nor sound nor motion made :
Its path was not upon the sea,
In ripple or in shade.
It raised my hair, it fanned my cheek
Like a meadow-gale of spring- It mingled strangely with my fears,
Yet it felt like a welcoming.
Swiftly, swiftly flew the ship,
Yet she sailed softly too :
Sweetly, sweetly blew the breeze- On me alone it blew.
Oh! dream of joy! is this indeed The light-house top Isee ?
Is this the hill ? is this the kirk ?
Is this mine own countree ?
Wedrifted o'er the harbour-bar,
And I with sobs did pray440


THE ANCIENT MARINER
O let me awake, my God!
Or let me sleep alway.
The harbour-bay was clear as glass,
So smoothly it was strewn !
And on the bay the moonlight lay,
And the shadow of the Moon.
The rock shone bright, the kirk no less,
That stands above the rock :
The moonlight steeped in silentness The steady weathercock.
And the bay was white with silent light
Till rising from the same,
Full many shapes, that shadows were,
In crimson colours came.
Alittle distance from the prow Those crimson shadows were :
I turned my eyes upon the deck- Oh, Christ ! what saw I there !
Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat And, by the holy rood !
Aman all light, a seraph-man,
On every corse there stood.
This seraph-band, each waved his hand :
It was a heavenly sight !
They stood as signals to the land,
Each one a lovely light ;


THE ANCIENT MARINER
This seraph-band, each wavedhis hand,
No voice did they impart- No voice; but oh! the silence sank
Like music on myheart.
But soon I heard the dash of oars,
I heard the Pilot's cheer ;
Myhead was turned perforce away,
And I saw a boat appear.
The Pilot and the Pilot's boy,
I heard them coming fast:
Dear Lord in Heaven! it was ajoy The dead men could not blast.
I saw a third-I heard his voice:
It is the Hermit good!
He singeth loud his godly hymns That he makes in the wood.
He'll shrieve my soul, he'll wash away The Albatross's blood.
