THANATOPSIS
"Cold weather," thought Daffy, still working away;
"The earth's hard to-day;
There's but a half-inch of my leaves to be seen,
And two-thirds of that is more yellow than green.
"I can't do much yet, but I'll do what I can;
It's well I began;
For unless I can manage to lift up my head,
The people will think that Spring herself's dead."
So little by little she brought her leaves out,
All clustered about ;
And then her bright flowers began to unfold,
Till Daffy stood robed in her spring green and gold.
Oh, Daffy-Down-Dilly, so brave and so true!
I wish all were like you :
So ready for duty in all sorts of weather,
And showing forth courage and beauty together.


TTHANATOPSIS
By William Cullen Bryant
O him who, in the love of Nature, holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks Avarious language: for his gayer hours She has a voice of gladness, and a smile And eloquence of beauty ; and she glides
Into his darker musings with a mild


THANATOPSIS
And gentle sympathy, that steals away Their sharpness, ere he is aware. When thoughts
Of the last bitter hour come like a blight
Over thy spirit, and sad images
Of the stern agony, and shroud, and pall,
And breathless darkness, and the narrow house,
Make thee to shudder, and grow sick at heart,
Go forth under the open sky, and list
To Nature's teachings, while from all around- Earth and her waters, and the depths of airComes a still voice-Yet a few days, and thee
The all-beholding sun shall see no more
In all his course ; nor yet in the cold ground,
Where thy pale form was laid, with many tears,
Nor in the embrace of ocean, shall exist
Thy image. Earth, that nourished thee, shall claim
Thy growth, to be resolved to earth again;
And, lost each human trace, surrendering up
Thine individual being, shalt thou go To mix forever with the elements ;
To be a brother to the insensible rock,
And to the sluggish clod, which the rude swain Turns with his share, and treads upon. The oak Shall send his roots abroad, and pierce thy mould.
Yet not to thine eternal resting-place
Shalt thou retire alone-nor couldst thou wish
Couch more magnificent. Thou shalt lie down
With patriarchs of the infant world-with kings,
The powerful of the earth-the wise, the good,
Fair forms, and hoary seers of ages past,
All in one mighty sepulcher. The hills,
Rock-ribbed, and ancient as the sun; the vales


THANATOPSIS
Stretching in pensive quietness between ;
The venerable woods; rivers that move
Inmajesty, and the complaining brooks,
That make the meadows green; and, poured round all,
Old ocean's gray and melancholy waste- Arebut the solemn decorations all
Of the great tomb of man! The golden sun,
The planets, all the infinite host of heaven,
Are shining on the sad abodes of death,
Through the still lapse of ages. All that tread The globe are but a handful to the tribes
That slumber in its bosom. Take the wings
Of morning, traverse Barca's desert sands,
Or lose thyself in the continuous woods Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound Save his own dashings-yet the dead are there!
And millions in those solitudes, since first
The flight of years began, have laid them down In their last sleep-the dead reign there alone !
So shalt thou rest; and what if thou withdraw
In silence from the living, and no friend
Take note of thy departure ? All that breathe Will share thy destiny. The gay will laugh When thou art gone, the solemn brood of care Plod on, and each one, as before, will chase
His favorite phantom; yet all these shall leave Their mirth and their employments, and shall come
And make their bed with thee. As the long
train
Of ages glide away, the sons of men- Theyouth in life's green spring, and he who goes In the full strength of years, matron and maid,
