BARBARA FRIETCHIE
The man that bears it is bent and old,
And ragged his beard and grayBut look at his eye fire young and bold,
At the tune that he hears them play.
The old tune thunders through all the air,
And strikes right in to the heart ;
If ever it calls for you, boy, be there!
Be there, and ready to start.
Off with your hat as the flag goes by!
Uncover the youngster's head!
Teach him to hold it holy and high For the sake of its sacred dead.


UBARBARA FRIETCHIE
By John Greenleaf Whittier
Pfrom the meadows rich with corn,
Clear in the cool September morn,
The clustered spires of Frederick stand Green-walled by the hills of Maryland.
Round about them orchards sweep,
Apple and peach tree fruited deep,
Fair as a garden of the Lord
To the eyes of the famished rebel horde,
On that pleasant morn of the early fall When Lee marched over the mountain wall


BARBARA FRIETCHIE
Over the mountains, winding down,
Horse and foot into Frederick town.
Forty flags with their silver stars,
Forty flags with their crimson bars,
Flapped in the morning wind; the sun Of noon looked down, and saw not one.
Up rose old Barbara Frietchie then,
Bowed with her fourscore years and ten;
Bravest of all in Frederick town,
She took up the flag the menhauled down;
In her attic window the staff she set,
To show that one heart was loyal yet.
Up the street came the rebel tread,
Stonewall Jackson riding ahead.
Under his slouch hat left and right He glanced: the old flag met his sight.
"Halt! "-the dust-brown ranks stood fast;
"Fire!"-out blazed the rifle-blast.
It shivered the window, pane and sash;
It rent the banner with seam and gash.
Quick, as it fell, from the broken staff Dame Barbara snatched the silken scarf;


BARBARA FRIETCHIE
She leaned far out on the window-sill,
And shook it forth with a royal will.
"Shoot, if you must, this old grayhead,
But spare your country's flag," she said.
Ashade of sadness, ablush of shame,
Over the face of the leader came;
The nobler nature within him stirred
To life at that woman's deed and word:
"Who touches ahair of yon grayhead Dies like a dog! March on!" he said.
All day long through Frederick street Sounded the tread of marching feet ;
All day long that free flag tost Over the heads of the rebel host.
Ever its torn folds rose and fell
Onthe loyal winds that loved it well;
And through the hill-gaps sunset light
Shone over it with awarm good-night.
Barbara Frietchie's work is o'er,
And the rebel rides on his raids no mora
Honor to her! and let a tear
Fall, for her sake, on Stonewall's bier.

SHERIDAN'S RIDE
Over Barbara Frietchie's grave,
Flag of freedom and union wave!
Peace and order and beauty draw
Round thy symbol of light and law;
And ever the stars above look down
On thy stars below in Frederick town.
i
SHERIDAN'S RIDE
By Thomas Buchanan Read
from the South at break of Uringing to winchester freshedismay,
The affrighted air with a shudder bore,
Like a herald in haste, to the chieftain's door,
The terrible grumble, and rumble, and roar,
Telling the battle was on once more,
And Sheridan twenty miles away.
And wider still those billows of war
Thundered along the horizon's bar ;
And louder yet into Winchester rolled The roar of that red sea uncontrolled,
Making the blood of the listener cold,
As he thought of the stake in that fiery fray,
And Sheridan twenty miles away.
But there is a road from Winchester town,
Agood broad highway leading down;
And there, through the flush of the morning light,
Asteed as black as the steeds of night

SHERIDAN'S RIDE
Was seen to pass, as with eagle flight,
As if he knew the terrible need ;
He stretched away with his utmost speed ;
Hills rose and fell; but his heart was gay,
With Sheridan fifteen miles away.
Still sprung from those swift hoofs, thundering
South,
The dust, like smoke from the cannon's mouth;
Or a trail of a comet, sweeping faster and faster,
Foreboding to traitors the doom of disaster.
The heart of the steed and the heart of the master
Were beating like prisoners assaulting their walls,
Impatient to be where the battlefield calls ;
Every nerve of the charger was strained to full
play,
With Sheridan only ten miles away.
Under his spurning feet the road Like an arrowy Alpine river flowed,
And the landscape sped away behind Like an ocean flying before the wind ;
And the steed, like a bark fed with furnace ire,
Swept on with his wild eye full of fire.
But lo! he is nearing his heart's desire ;
He is snuffing the smoke of the roaring fray,
With Sheridan only five miles away.
The first that the General saw were the groups
Of stragglers, and then the retreating troops.
What was done ? what to do? A glance told him
both.
Then, striking his spurs, with a terrible oath,
