CARDINAL WOLSEY SPEECH TOCROMWELLC
By William Shakespeare
ROMWELL, Idid not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries; but thou hast forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
Let's dry our eyes : and thus far hear me, Cromwell ;
And-when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Of me more must be heard of-say, I taught thee,
Say, Wolsey-that once trod the ways of glory,
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honorFound thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in;
Asure and safe one, though thy master missed it.
Mark but my fall, and that that ruined me.
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition :
By that sin fell the angels ; how can man, then,
The image of his Maker, hope to win by't?
Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that hate
thee:
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not:

WOLSEY'S FALL
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
Thy God's, and truth's; then if thou fall'st, O
Cromwell!
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr. Serve the king;
And-pr'ythee, lead me in:
There take an inventory of all I have,
To the last penny; 'tis the king's : my robe,
And my integrity to heaven, is all Idare now call mine own. Ο Cromwell, Cromwell!
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
I served my king, he would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies !
-From "Henry VIII."
WOLSEY'S FALL
By William Shakespeare
MAREWELL, along farewell, to all mygreat- Fness!
This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth The tender leaves of hope; to-morrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him:
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost ;
And-whenhe thinks, good easy man, full surely His greatness is a ripening-nips his root,
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a sea of glory;
But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride At length broke under me; and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy Of a rude stream, that must forever hide me.
