FOREIGN CHILDREN
By Robert Louis Stevenson
LITTLE Indian Sioux or Crow,
☑ Little frosty Eskimo,
Little Turk or Japanee,
Oh! don't you wish that you were me?
You have seen the scarlet trees
And the lions over seas ;
Youhave eaten ostrich eggs,
Andturned the turtles off their legs.
Such a life is very fine,
But it's not so nice as mine:
You must often, as you trod,
Have wearied not to be abroad.

VISIT FROM ST. NICHOLAS
You have curious things to eat,
Iam fed on proper meat;
You must dwell beyond the foam,
But I am safe and live at home.
Little Indian, Sioux or Crow,
Little frosty Eskimo,
Little Turk or Japanee,
Oh! don't you wish that you were me!
A VISIT FROM ST. NICHOLAS
By Clement C. Moore
Twas throughthe night before Christmas, when all
Not a creature was stirring, not even amouse.
The stockings were hung by the chimney with care,
In hopes that St. Nicholas soon would be there.
The children were nestled all snug in their beds,
Whilevisions of sugar-plums danced in their heads;
Andmamma in her kerchief, and I in my cap,
Had just settled our brains for a long winter's
nap- When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter,
Isprang from mybed to see what was the matter.
Away to the window I flew like a flash,
Tore open the shutters and threw up the sash.
The moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow
Gave a luster of midday to objects below;
When what to my wondering eyes should appear But a miniature sleigh and eight tiny reindeer.
With alittle old driver, so lively and quick,
I knew in a moment it must be St. Nick.

VISIT FROM ST. NICHOLAS
More rapid than eagles his coursers they came,
And he whistled, and shouted, and called them by
name:
"Now, Dasher! now, Dancer! now, Prancer and Vixen!
On! Comet, on! Cupid, on! Donder and BlitzenTo the top of the porch, to the top of the wall,
Now, dash away, dash away, dash away all!"
As dry leaves that before the wild hurricane fly
When they meet with an obstacle mount to the sky,
So up to the house-top the coursers they flew,
With a sleigh full of toys-and St. Nicholas, too.
Andthen, in a twinkling, I heard on the roof
The prancing and pawing of each little hoof.
As I drew in myhead, and was turning around,
Down the chimney St. Nicholas came with a bound:
He was dressed all in fur from his head to his foot,
And his clothes were all tarnished with ashes and
soot;
Abundle of toys he had flung on his back,
Andhe looked like a peddler just opening his pack.
His eyes, how they twinkled! his dimples, how merry!
His cheeks were like roses, his nose like a cherry ;
His droll little mouthwas drawnup like abow,
And the beard on his chin was as white as the snow.
The stump of a pipe he held tight in his teeth,
And the smoke it encircled his head like a wreath.
He had a broad face and a little round belly
That shook when he laughed, like a bowl full of jelly.
He was chubby and plump-a right jolly old elf- And I laughed when I saw him, in spite of myself;
