THE MILKMAID
But if twenty for accident should be detached,
It will leave me just sixty sound eggs to be hatched.
"Well, sixty sound eggs-no, sound chickens, I
mean:
Of these some may die-we'll suppose seventeen,
Seventeen! not so many-say ten at the most,
Which will leave fifty chickens to boil or to roast.
"But then there's their barley: how much will they
need?
Why, they take but one grain at atime when they feedSo that's a mere trifle ; now then, let us see,
At a fair market price how much money there'll be.
" Six shillings a pair-five-four-three-and-six,
To prevent all mistakes, that low price I will fix ;
Now what will that make? fifty chickens, I said- Fifty times three-and-sixpence-I'll ask Brother Ned.
"O, but
'em;
stop-three-and-sixpence apair I must sell
Well, a pair is a couple-now then let us tell 'em;
Acouple in fifty will go (mypoorbrain!)
Why, just a score times, and five pair will remain.
"Twenty- five pairs of fowls-now how tiresome
it is
That I can't reckon up so much money as this !
Well, there's no use in trying, so let's give a guess- I'll say twenty pounds, and it can't be no less.
Jun. Cl-10 195 7
HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
"Twenty pounds, I am certain, will buy me a cow,
Thirty geese, and two turkeys-eight pigs and a
Sow;
Nowif these turn out well, at the end of the year,
I shall fill both my pockets with guineas, 'tis clear."
Forgetting her burden, when this she had said,
The maid superciliously tossed up her head;
When, alas for her prospects! her milk-pail de- scended,
And so all her schemes for the future were ended.
This moral, I think, may be safely attached- "Reckon not on your chickens before they are hatched."
HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
By Henry W. Longfellow
Ythe shores of B
Gitche Gumee,
By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
Stood the wigwam of Nokomis,
Daughter of the Moon, Nokomis.
Dark behind it rose the forest,
Rose the black and gloomy pine-trees,
Rose the firs with cones upon them;
Bright before it beat the water,
Beat the clear and sunny water,
Beat the shining Big-Sea-Water.
There the wrinkled old Nokomis
Nursed the little Hiawatha,
Rocked him in his linden cradle,

HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
Bedded soft in moss and rushes,
Safely bound with reindeer sinews ;
Stilled his fretful wail by saying,
"Hush! the Naked Bear will hear thee!"
Lulled him into slumber, singing,
"Ewa-yea! my little owlet!
Who is this that lights the wigwam?
Withhis great eyes lights the wigwam?
Ewa-yea! my little owlet!"
Many things Nokomis taught him Of the stars that shine in heaven;
Showed him Ishkoodah, the comet,
Ishkoodah, with fiery tresses ;
Showed the Death-Dance of the spirits,
Warriors with their plumes and war-clubs,
Flaring far away to northward
In the frosty nights of winter;
Showed the broad, white road in heaven,
Pathway of the ghosts, the shadows,
Running straight across the heavens,
Crowded with the ghosts, the shadows.
At the door, on summer evenings,
Sat the little Hiawatha;
Heard the whispering of the pine-trees,
Heard the lapping of the water,
Sounds of music, words of wonder;
"Minnie-wawa!" said the pine-trees,
"Mudway-aushka! " said the water;
Saw the fire-fly, Wah-wah-taysee,
Flitting through the dusk of evening,
With the twinkle of its candle

HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD
Lighting up the brakes and bushes,
And he sang the song of children,
Sang the song Nokomis taught him:
"Wah-wah-taysee, little fire-fly,
Little, flitting, white-fire insect,
Little, dancing, white-fire creature,
Light me with your little candle,
Ere upon my bed I lay me,
Ere in sleep I close my eyelids !"
Saw the moon rise from the water
Rippling, rounding from the water,
Saw the flecks and shadows on it,
Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis?"
Andthe good Nokomis answered:
"Once a warrior, very angry,
Seized his grandmother, and threw her
Up into the sky at midnight ;
Right against the moon he threw her ;
'Tis her body that you see there."
Saw the rainbow in the heaven,
In the eastern sky, the rainbow,
Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis ?"
And the good Nokomis answered :
" Tis the heaven of flowers you see there ;
All the wild-flowers of the forest,
All the lilies of the prairie,
Whenon earth they fade and perish,
Blossom in that heaven above us."
Whenhe heard the owls at midnight,
Hooting, laughing in the forest,
;
:
