UNCLE DAVID'S NONSENSICAL STORY

By Catherine Sinclair

In the days of yore children were not all such clever, good, sensible
people as they are now. Lessons were then considered rather a plague,
sugar-plums were still in demand, holidays continued yet in fashion,
and toys were not then made to teach mathematics, nor story-books to
give instruction in chemistry and navigation. These were very strange
times, and there existed at that period a very idle, greedy, naughty
boy, such as we never hear of in the present day. His father and
mother were--no matter who, and he lived--no matter where. His name
was Master No-book, and he seemed to think his eyes were made for
nothing but to stare out of the windows, and his mouth for no other
purpose but to eat. This young gentleman hated lessons like mustard,
both of which brought tears into his eyes, and during school hours he
sat gazing at his books, pretending to be busy, while his mind
wandered away to wish impatiently for dinner, and to consider where he
could get the nicest pies, pastry, ices, and jellies, while he smacked
his lips at the very thoughts of them.

Whenever Master No-book spoke it was always to ask for something, and
you might continually hear him say in a whining tone of voice:
"Father, may I take this piece of cake?" "Aunt Sarah, will you give me
an apple?" "Mother, do send me the whole of that plum-pudding."
Indeed, very frequently, when he did not get permission to gormandize,
this naughty glutton helped himself without leave. Even his dreams
were like his waking hours, for he had often a horrible nightmare
about lessons, thinking he was smothered with Greek lexicons or pelted
out of the school with a shower of English grammars, while one night
he fancied himself sitting down to devour an enormous plum-cake, and
all on a sudden it became transformed into a Latin dictionary.

One afternoon Master No-book, having played truant all day from
school, was lolling on his mother's best sofa in the drawing-room with
his leather boots tucked up on the satin cushions, and nothing to do
but to suck a few oranges, and nothing to think of but how much sugar
to put upon them, when suddenly an event took place which filled him
with astonishment.

A sound of soft music stole into the room, becoming louder and louder
the longer he listened, till at length, in a few moments afterwards, a
large hole burst open in the wall of his room, and there stepped into
his presence two magnificent fairies, just arrived from their castles
in the air, to pay him a visit. They had travelled all the way on
purpose to have some conversation with Master No-book, and immediately
introduced themselves in a very ceremonious manner.

The fairy Do-nothing was gorgeously dressed with a wreath of flaming
gas round her head, a robe of gold tissue, a necklace of rubies, and
a bouquet in her hand of glittering diamonds. Her cheeks were rouged
to the very eyes, her teeth were set in gold, and her hair was of a
most brilliant purple; in short, so fine and fashionable-looking a
fairy was never seen in a drawing-room before. The fairy Teach-all,
who followed next, was simply dressed in white muslin, with bunches of
natural flowers in her light-brown hair, and she carried in her hand a
few neat small volumes, which Master No-book looked at with a shudder
of aversion.

The two fairies now informed him that they very often invited large
parties of children to spend some time at their palaces, but as they
lived in quite an opposite direction, it was necessary for their young
guests to choose which it would be best to visit first; therefore they
had now come to inquire of Master No-book whom he thought it would be
most agreeable to accompany on the present occasion.

"In my house," said the fairy Teach-all, speaking with a very sweet
smile and a soft, pleasing voice, "you shall be taught to find
pleasure in every sort of exertion, for I delight in activity and
diligence. My young friends rise at seven every morning, and amuse
themselves with working in a beautiful garden of flowers, rearing
whatever fruit they wish to eat, visiting among the poor, associating
pleasantly together, studying the arts and sciences, and learning to
know the world in which they live, and to fulfil the purposes for
which they have been brought into it. In short, all our amusements
tend to some useful object, either for our own improvement or the good
of others, and you will grow wiser, better, and happier every day you
remain in the palace of Knowledge."

"But in Castle Needless, where I live," interrupted the fairy
Do-nothing, rudely pushing her companion aside with an angry,
contemptuous look, "we never think of exerting ourselves for anything.
You may put your head in your pocket and your hands in your sides as
long as you choose to stay. No one is ever even asked a question, that
he may be spared the trouble of answering. We lead the most
fashionable life imaginable, for nobody speaks to anybody. Each of my
visitors is quite an exclusive, and sits with his back to as many of
the company as possible, in the most comfortable arm-chair that can be
contrived. There, if you are only so good as to take the trouble of
wishing for anything, it is yours without even turning an eye round to
look where it comes from. Dresses are provided of the most magnificent
kind, which go on themselves, without your having the smallest
annoyance with either buttons or strings; games which you can play
without an effort of thought; and dishes dressed by a French cook,
smoking hot under your nose, from morning till night; while any rain
we have is either made of lemonade or lavender-water, and in winter it
generally snows iced punch for an hour during the forenoon."

Nobody need be told which fairy Master No-book preferred, and quite
charmed at his own good fortune in receiving so agreeable an
invitation, he eagerly gave his hand to the splendid new acquaintance
who promised him so much pleasure and ease, and gladly proceeded in a
carriage lined with velvet, stuffed with downy pillows, and drawn by
milk-white swans, to that magnificent residence, Castle Needless,
which was lighted by a thousand windows during the day, and by a
million of lamps every night.

Here Master No-book enjoyed a constant holiday and a constant feast,
while a beautiful lady covered with jewels was ready to tell him
stories from morning till night, and servants waited to pick up his
playthings if they fell, or to draw out his purse or his
pocket-handkerchief when he wished to use them.

Thus Master No-book lay dozing for hours and days on rich embroidered
cushions, never stirring from his place, but admiring the view of
trees covered with the richest burnt almonds, grottoes of sugar-candy,
a _jet d'eau_ of champagne, a wide sea which tasted of sugar instead
of salt, and a bright, clear pond, filled with gold fish that let
themselves be caught whenever he pleased. Nothing could be more
complete, and yet, very strange to say, Master No-book did not seem
particularly happy. This appears exceedingly unreasonable, when so
much trouble was taken to please him; but the truth is that every day
he became more fretful and peevish. No sweetmeats were worth the
trouble of eating, nothing was pleasant to play at, and in the end he
wished it were possible to sleep all day, as well as all night.

Not a hundred miles from the fairy Do-nothing's palace there lived a
most cruel monster called the giant Snap-'em-up, who looked, when he
stood up, like the tall steeple of a great church, raising his head so
high that he could peep over the loftiest mountains, and was obliged
to climb up a ladder to comb his own hair.

Every morning regularly this prodigiously great giant walked round the
world before breakfast for an appetite, after which he made tea in a
large lake, used the sea as a slop-basin, and boiled his kettle on
Mount Vesuvius. He lived in great style, and his dinners were most
magnificent, consisting very often of an elephant roasted whole,
ostrich patties, a tiger smothered in onions, stewed lions, and whale
soup; but for a side-dish his greatest favourite consisted of little
boys, as fat as possible, fried in crumbs of bread, with plenty of
pepper and salt.

No children were so well fed or in such good condition for eating as
those in the fairy Do-nothing's garden, who was a very particular
friend of the giant Snap-'em-up, and who sometimes laughingly said
she would give him a license, and call her own garden his "preserve,"
because she always allowed him to help himself, whenever he pleased,
to as many of her visitors as he chose, without taking the trouble
even to count them; and in return for such extreme civility, the giant
very frequently invited her to dinner.

Snap-'em-up's favourite sport was to see how many brace of little boys
he could bag in a morning; so, in passing along the streets, he peeped
into all the drawing-rooms, without having occasion to get upon
tiptoe, and picked up every young gentleman who was idly looking out
of the windows, and even a few occasionally who were playing truant
from school; but busy children seemed always somehow quite out of his
reach.

One day, when Master No-book felt even more lazy, more idle, and more
miserable than ever, he lay beside a perfect mountain of toys and
cakes, wondering what to wish for next, and hating the very sight of
everything and everybody. At last he gave so loud a yawn of weariness
and disgust that his jaw very nearly fell out of joint, and then he
sighed so deeply that the giant Snap-'em-up heard the sound as he
passed along the road after breakfast, and instantly stepped into the
garden, with his glass at his eye, to see what was the matter.
Immediately, on observing a large, fat, overgrown boy, as round as a
dumpling, lying on a bed of roses, he gave a cry of delight, followed
by a gigantic peal of laughter, which was heard three miles off, and
picking up Master No-book between his finger and thumb, with a pinch
that very nearly broke his ribs, he carried him rapidly towards his
own castle, while the fairy Do-nothing laughingly shook her head as he
passed, saying:

"That little man does me a great credit. He has only been fed for a
week, and is as fat already as a prize ox. What a dainty morsel he
will be! When do you dine to-day, in case I should have time to look
in upon you?"

On reaching home the giant immediately hung up Master No-book by the
hair of his head, on a prodigious hook in the larder, having first
taken some large lumps of nasty suet, forcing them down his throat to
make him become still fatter, and then stirring the fire, that he
might be almost melted with heat, to make his liver grow larger. On a
shelf quite near Master No-book perceived the bodies of six other
boys, whom he remembered to have seen fattening in the fairy
Do-nothing's garden, while he recollected how some of them had
rejoiced at the thoughts of leading a long, useless, idle life, with
no one to please but themselves.

The enormous cook now seized hold of Master No-book, brandishing her
knife with an aspect of horrible determination, intending to kill him,
while he took the trouble of screaming and kicking in the most
desperate manner, when the giant turned gravely round, and said that,
as pigs were considered a much greater dainty when whipped to death
than killed in any other way, he meant to see whether children might
not be improved by it also; therefore she might leave that great hog
of a boy till he had time to try the experiment, especially as his own
appetite would be improved by the exercise. This was a dreadful
prospect for the unhappy prisoner, but meantime it prolonged his life
a few hours, as he was immediately hung up in the larder and left to
himself. There, in torture of mind and body, like a fish upon a hook,
the wretched boy began at last to reflect seriously upon his former
ways, and to consider what a happy home he might have had, if he could
only have been satisfied with business and pleasure succeeding each
other, like day and night, while lessons might have come in as a
pleasant sauce to his play-hours, and his play-hours as a sauce to his
lessons.

In the midst of many reflections, which were all very sensible, though
rather too late, Master No-book's attention became attracted by the
sound of many voices laughing, talking, and singing, which caused him
to turn his eyes in a new direction, when, for the first time, he
observed that the fairy Teach-all's garden lay upon a beautiful
sloping bank not far off. There a crowd of merry, noisy, rosy-cheeked
boys were busily employed, and seemed happier than the day was long,
while poor Master No-book watched them during his own miserable hours,
envying the enjoyment with which they raked the flower-borders,
gathered the fruit, carried baskets of vegetables to the poor, worked
with carpenter's tools, drew pictures, shot with bows-and-arrows,
played at cricket, and then sat in the sunny arbours learning their
tasks, or talking agreeably together, till at length, a dinner-bell
having been rung, the whole party sat merrily down with hearty
appetites and cheerful good-humour, to an entertainment of plain roast
meat and pudding, where the fairy Teach-all presided herself, and
helped her guests moderately to as much as was good for each.

Large tears rolled down the cheeks of Master No-book while watching
this scene, and remembering that if he had known what was best for
him, he might have been as happy as the happiest of these excellent
boys, instead of suffering ennui and weariness, as he had done at the
fairy Do-nothing's, ending in a miserable death. But his attention was
soon after most alarmingly roused by hearing the giant Snap-'em-up
again in conversation with his cook, who said that, if he wished for
a good large dish of scalloped children at dinner, it would be
necessary to catch a few more, as those he had already provided would
scarcely be a mouthful.

As the giant kept very fashionable hours, and always waited dinner for
himself till nine o'clock, there was still plenty of time; so, with a
loud grumble about the trouble, he seized a large basket in his hand,
and set off at a rapid pace towards the fairy Teach-all's garden. It
was very seldom that Snap-'em-up ventured to think of foraging in this
direction, as he never once succeeded in carrying off a single captive
from the enclosure, it was so well fortified and so bravely defended;
but on this occasion, being desperately hungry, he felt as bold as a
lion, and walked, with outstretched hands, straight towards the fairy
Teach-all's dinner-table, taking such prodigious strides that he
seemed almost as if he would trample on himself.

A cry of consternation arose the instant this tremendous giant
appeared, and, as usual on such occasions, when he had made the same
attempt before, a dreadful battle took place. Fifty active little boys
bravely flew upon the enemy, armed with their dinner-knives, and
looked like a nest of hornets, stinging him in every direction, till
he roared with pain, and would have run away; but the fairy Teach-all,
seeing his intention, rushed forward with the carving-knife, and
brandishing it high over her head, she most courageously stabbed him
to the heart.

If a great mountain had fallen to the earth it would have seemed like
nothing in comparison with the giant Snap-'em-up, who crushed two or
three houses to powder beneath him, and upset several fine monuments
that were to have made people remembered for ever. But all this would
have seemed scarcely worth mentioning had it not been for a still
greater event which occurred on the occasion, no less than the death
of the fairy Do-nothing, who had been indolently looking on at this
great battle without taking the trouble to interfere, or even to care
who was victorious; but being also lazy about running away, when the
giant fell, his sword came with so violent a stroke on her head that
she instantly expired.

Thus, luckily for the whole world, the fairy Teach-all got possession
of immense property, which she proceeded without delay to make the
best use of in her power.

In the first place, however, she lost no time in liberating Master
No-book from his hook in the larder, and gave him a lecture on
activity, moderation, and good conduct, which he never afterwards
forgot; and it was astonishing to see the change that took place
immediately in his whole thoughts and actions. From this very hour
Master No-book became the most diligent, active, happy boy in the
fairy Teach-all's garden; and on returning home a month afterwards, he
astonished all the masters at school by his extraordinary reformation.
The most difficult lessons were a pleasure to him, he scarcely ever
stirred without a book in his hand, never lay on a sofa again, would
scarcely even sit on a chair with a back to it, but preferred a
three-legged stool, detested holidays, never thought any exertion a
trouble, preferred climbing over the top of a hill to creeping round
the bottom, always ate the plainest food in very small quantities,
joined a temperance society, and never tasted a morsel till he had
worked very hard and got an appetite.

Not long after this an old uncle, who had formerly been ashamed of
Master No-book's indolence and gluttony, became so pleased at the
wonderful change that on his death he left him a magnificent estate,
desiring that he should take his name; therefore, instead of being any
longer one of the No-book family, he is now called Sir Timothy
Blue-stocking, a pattern to the whole country around for the good he
does to everyone, and especially for his extraordinary activity,
appearing as if he could do twenty things at once. Though generally
very good-natured and agreeable, Sir Timothy is occasionally observed
in a violent passion, laying about him with his walking-stick in the
most terrific manner, and beating little boys within an inch of their
lives; but on inquiry it invariably appears that he has found them out
to be lazy, idle, or greedy; for all the industrious boys in the
parish are sent to get employment from him, while he assures them that
they are far happier breaking stones on the road than if they were
sitting idly in a drawing-room with nothing to do.
